--- Page 1 ---
आङ्गिरसस्मृतिः
श्रीगणेशाय नमः 

अथादौ प्रायश्चित्तविधानवर्णनम्
Now, first, the description of the prescribed forms of expiation.

गृहाश्रमेषु धर्मेषु वर्णानामनुपूर्वशः प्रायश्चित्त विधिं दृष्ट्वा अङ्गिरामुनिरब्रवीत् १
Having examined the rules of expiation, in due order according to the varṇas, for the duties of the householders, Sage Aṅgirā spoke. १

अन्त्यानामपि सिद्धान्नं भक्षयित्वा द्विजातयः चान्द्रं कृच्छ्रं तदर्द्धन्तु ब्रह्मक्षत्त्र विशां विदुः २
If the twice-born eat cooked food belonging even to the Antyajas, they should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa Kṛcchra; for Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas, half of that expiation is prescribed respectively. २

रजकश्चर्मकारश्च नटोवुरुड एव च कैवर्त्तभेदभिल्लाश्च सप्तैते चान्त्यजाः स्मृताः ३
The washerman, leather-worker, actor, Vuruda, Kaivarta, Bheda, and Bhilla—these seven are traditionally regarded as Antyajas. ३

अन्त्यजानां गृहे तोयं भाण्डे पर्युषितञ्च यत् प्रायश्चित्तं यदा पीतं तदैव हि समाचरेत् ४
If one drinks water in the house of an Antyaja, or drinks water that has remained in a vessel belonging to them, the prescribed expiation should be performed immediately upon drinking it. ४

चाण्डालकूपभाण्डेषु त्वज्ञानात्पिवते यदि प्रायश्चित्तं कथं तेषां वर्णे वर्णे विधीयते ५
If one unknowingly drinks from a well or vessel belonging to a Cāṇḍāla, what expiation is prescribed for them according to each varṇa?

चरेत् सान्तपनं विप्रः प्राजापत्यन्तु भूमिपः तदर्द्धन्तु चरेद्वैश्यः पादं शूद्रेषु दापयेत् ६
A Brāhmaṇa should perform the Sāntapana expiation; a Kṣatriya should perform the Prājāpatya; a Vaiśya should perform half of that; and a Śūdra should perform one quarter of it. ६

अज्ञानात् पिवते तोयं ब्राह्मणस्त्वन्त्यजातिषु अहोरात्रोषितोभूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ७
If a Brāhmaṇa unknowingly drinks water among the Antyajas, he should fast for a day and a night and become purified through Pañcagavya. ७

विप्रो विप्रेण संस्पृष्ट उच्छिष्टेन कदाचन आचान्त एव शुध्येत अङ्गिरामुनिरब्रवीत् ८
If a Brāhmaṇa is ever touched by the remnants of food from another Brāhmaṇa, he becomes purified simply by performing ācamana. Thus spoke Sage Aṅgirā. ८

क्षत्रियेण यदा स्पृष्ट उच्छिष्टेन कदाचन स्त्रानं जप्यन्तु कुर्वीत दिनस्यार्द्धन शुध्यति ९
If he is ever touched by the food remnants of a Kṣatriya, he should bathe and perform japa; he becomes purified by half a day. ९

वैश्येन तु यदा स्पृष्टः शुना शूद्रेण वा द्विजः उपोष्य रजनीमेकां पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १०
If a twice-born person is touched by a Vaiśya, a dog, or a Śūdra, he should fast for one night and become purified through Pañcagavya. १०

अनुच्छिष्टेन संस्पृष्टौ स्त्रानं येन विधीयते तेनैवोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् ११
For one who is touched by someone who has not partaken of food remnants, bathing is prescribed; but for one touched by food remnants, the Prājāpatya expiation should be performed. ११


--- Page 2 ---

अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि नीली वस्त्रस्य वै विधिम् स्त्रीणां क्रीडार्थसंयोगे शयनीये न दुष्यति १२
Henceforth I shall explain the rules concerning indigo-dyed cloth. In the case of women, it does not cause impurity when used for play or for bedding.

पालने विक्रये चैव तद्वत्तेरूपजीवने पतितस्तु भवेद्विप्रस्त्रिभिः कृच्छ्रेर्व्यपोहति १३
If a Brāhmaṇa engages in its cultivation, sale, or makes a livelihood from it, he becomes fallen; he removes that fault by performing three Kṛcchra penances.

स्त्रानं दानं जपो होमः स्वाध्यायः पितृतर्पणम् वृथा तस्य महायज्ञा नीलीवस्त्रस्य धारणात् १४
Bathing, charity, japa, homa, study of the Veda, offerings to the ancestors, and the great sacrifices become fruitless for one who wears indigo-dyed cloth.

नीलीरक्तं यदा वस्त्रमज्ञानेन तु धारयेत् अहोरात्रोषितोभूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १५
If one unknowingly wears indigo-dyed red cloth, one should fast for a day and a night and become purified through Pañcagavya.

नीलीदारु यदा भिन्द्याद्ब्राह्मणं वै प्रमादतः शोणितं दृश्यते यत्र द्विजश्चान्द्रायणञ्चरेत् १६
If a Brāhmaṇa accidentally cuts indigo wood and blood is seen there, the twice-born should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance.

नीलीवृक्षेण पक्वन्तु अन्नमश्नाति चेद्विजः आहार वमनं कृत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १७
If a twice-born person eats food cooked with the wood of the indigo plant, he should induce vomiting of the food and become purified through Pañcagavya.

भक्षन् प्रमादतोनीलीं द्विजातिस्त्व समाहितः त्रिषु वर्णेषु सामान्यं चान्द्रायणमिति स्थितम् १८
If a twice-born person, through negligence, eats indigo, the Cāndrāyaṇa penance is prescribed as common to the three higher varṇas.

नीलौरक्तेन वस्त्रेण यदन्नमुपनीयते नोपतिष्ठति दातारं भोक्ता भुङ्गे तु किल्विषम् १९
Food that is offered by someone wearing indigo-dyed red cloth does not become acceptable to the recipient; if the recipient eats it, he incurs sin.

नीलीरक्तेन वस्त्रेण यत्पाके श्रपितं भवेत् तेन भुक्तेन विप्राणां दिनमेकमजोजनम् २०
If food has been cooked by one wearing indigo-dyed red cloth, a Brāhmaṇa who eats it should abstain from food for one day.

मृते भर्त्तरि या नारी नीलीवस्त्रं प्रधारयेत् भर्त्ता तु नरकं याति सा नारी तदनन्तरम् २१
If a woman wears indigo-dyed cloth after the death of her husband, her husband goes to hell, and the woman likewise goes there afterward.

नील्या चोपहते क्षेत्रे शस्यं यत्तु प्ररोहति अभोज्यं तद्विजातीनां भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् २२
The crop that grows in a field affected by indigo is unfit for consumption by the twice-born; if eaten, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance.

देवद्रोण्यां वृषोत्सर्गे यज्ञे दाने तथैव च अत्र स्त्रानं न कर्त्तव्यं दूषिता च वसुन्धरा २३
In the sacred enclosure of the deity, at the release of a bull, during a sacrifice, and during charity, one should not bathe there, for the earth has become impure.

वापिता यत्र नीली स्यात्तावद्भूम्य शुचिर्भवेत् यावद्वादशवर्षाणि अतऊर्ध्वं शुचिर्भवेत् २४
Where indigo has been planted, the land remains impure for twelve years; after that period, it becomes pure.


--- Page 3 ---

भोजने चैव पाने च तथा चौषधभेषजैः एवं म्रियन्ते या गावः पादमेकं समाचरेत् २५
If cows die in this manner through food, drink, medicines, or remedies, one should perform one quarter of the prescribed penance.

घण्टाभरणदोषेण यत्र गौर्विनिपीडयते चरेदर्द्ध व्रतं तेषां भूषणार्थं हि तत् कृतम् २६
If a cow is injured because of the defect of a bell or ornament, one should perform half of the prescribed vow; such ornaments were made for the purpose of adornment.

दमने दामने रोधे अवघाते च वैकृते गवा प्रभवता घातैः पादोनं व्रतमाचरेत् २७
If a cow is harmed through restraint, tying, obstruction, striking, or other injuries caused by force, one should perform a vow amounting to three quarters of the prescribed penance.

अङ्गुष्ठपर्वमात्रस्तु बाहुमात्रः प्रमाणतः सपल्लवश्च साग्रश्च दण्डइत्यभिधीयते २८
A stick measuring one thumb-joint in thickness and one arm's length, with its sprout and tip intact, is called a daṇḍa.

दण्डादुक्ताद्यदान्येन पुरुषाः प्रहरन्ति गाम् द्विगुणं गोब्रतं तेषां प्रायश्चित्तं विशोधनम् २९
If men strike a cow with a stick other than the one prescribed above, their purification requires twice the Go-vrata as an expiation.

शृङ्गभङ्गे त्वस्थिभङ्गे चर्मनिर्मोचने तथा दशरात्रं चरेत् कृच्छ्रं यावत्स्वस्थोभवेत्तदा ३०
If the horns or bones of a cow are broken, or its skin is torn away, one should perform the Kṛcchra penance for ten nights, continuing until the cow becomes healthy.

गोमूत्रेण तु संमिश्र यावकञ्चोपजायते एतदेव हितं कृच्छ्रमिदमाङ्गिरसं मतम् ३१
Barley prepared by mixing it with cow urine is prescribed as beneficial; this is regarded as the Kṛcchra known as the Āṅgirasa Kṛcchra.

असमर्थस्य वालस्य पिता वा यदि वा गुरुः यमुद्दिश्य चरेद्धर्मं पापं तस्य न विद्यते ३२
For one who is incapable of performing the expiation, such as a child, the father or the guru may perform the prescribed religious rite on his behalf; the child incurs no sin.

अशीतिर्यस्य वर्षाणि वालोवाप्यूनषोडशः प्रायश्चित्तार्द्धमर्हन्ति स्त्रियो रोगिण एव च ३३
One who is eighty years old, a child below sixteen years of age, women, and the sick are entitled to perform half of the prescribed expiation.

मूच्छिते पतिते चापि गवि यष्टिप्रहारिते गायत्र्यष्टसहस्रन्तु प्रायश्चित्तं विशोधनम् ३४
If a cow becomes unconscious or falls down after being struck with a stick, recitation of the Gāyatrī eight thousand times is prescribed as the expiation for purification.

स्नात्वा रजस्वला चैव चतुर्थेऽह्नि विशुध्यति कुर्याद्रजसि निवृत्तेऽनिवृत्ते न कथञ्चन ३५
A menstruating woman becomes purified on the fourth day after bathing. The prescribed rites should be performed only after the menstrual flow has ceased, and never while it continues.

रोगेण यद्रजः स्त्रीणामत्यर्थं हि प्रवर्त्तते अशुच्यन्ता न तेन स्युस्तासां वैकारिकं हि तत् ३६
When menstrual flow in women continues excessively because of illness, they do not become impure on account of it, since such bleeding is caused by a disorder.

साध्वाचारा न तावत्स्याद्रजो यावत्प्रवर्त्तते वृत्ते रजसि गम्या स्त्री गृहकर्मणि चैन्द्रिये ३७
A woman is not considered fit for the prescribed conduct for as long as menstruation continues. After the menstrual flow has ceased, she may engage in household duties and marital relations.



--- Page 4 ---

प्रथमेऽहनि चाण्डाली द्वितीये ब्रह्मघातिनी तृतीये रजकी प्रोक्ता चतुर्थेऽहनि शुध्यति ३८
On the first day she is regarded as a Cāṇḍālī, on the second as a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa, on the third as a washerwoman, and on the fourth day she becomes purified.

रजस्वला यदा स्पृष्टा शुना शूद्रेण चैव हि उपोष्य रजनीमेकां पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ३९
If a menstruating woman is touched by a dog or by a Śūdra, she should fast for one night and become purified through Pañcagavya.

द्वावेतावशुची स्यातां दम्पती शयनङ्गतौ शयनादुत्थिता नारी शुचिः स्यादशुचिः पुमान् ४०
When a married couple enters the bed together, both are considered impure. After rising from the bed, the woman becomes pure, while the man remains impure.

गण्डूषं पादशौचञ्च न कुर्य्यात् कांस्यभाजने भस्मना शुध्यते कांस्यं ताम्रमम्लेन शुध्यति ४१
One should not perform mouth-rinsing or foot-washing in a bronze vessel. Bronze is purified with ashes, while copper is purified with an acidic substance.

रजसा शुध्यते नारी नदी वेगेन शुध्यति भूमौ निःक्षिप्य षण्मासमत्यन्तोपहतं शुचि ४२
A woman is purified through menstruation, and a river is purified by the force of its current. An object that has become extremely impure becomes pure after being placed upon the earth for six months.

गवाघ्रातानि कांस्यानि शूद्रोच्छिष्टानि यानि तु भस्मना दशभिः शुद्धयेत् काकेनोपहते तथा ४३
Bronze vessels that have been sniffed by a cow, or contaminated by the remnants of food left by a Śūdra, should be purified with ten applications of ashes; the same applies when they have been contaminated by a crow.

शौचं सौवर्णरूप्याणां वायुनार्केन्दुरश्मिभिः ४४
Gold and silver are purified by air and by the rays of the sun and moon.

रेतःस्पृष्टं शवस्पृष्टमाविकञ्च न दुष्यति अद्भिर्मृदा च तन्मात्रं प्रक्षाल्य च विशुध्यति ४५
That which has been touched by semen, a corpse, or a sheep does not become impure; it becomes purified merely by washing it with water and earth.

शुष्कमन्नमविप्रस्य भुक्त्वा सप्ताहमृच्छति अन्नं व्यञ्जनसंयुक्तमर्द्धमासेन जीर्य्यति ४६
After eating dry food belonging to one who is not a Brāhmaṇa, it is digested in seven days; food accompanied by vegetables and other preparations is digested in half a month.

पयोदधि च मासेन षण्मासेन घृतं तथा तैलं सवत्सरेणैव कोष्ठे जीर्य्यति वा नवा ४७
Milk and curd are digested in one month, ghee in six months, and oil in one year within the stomach, or perhaps not at all.

यो भुङ्गे हि च शूद्रान्नं मासमेकं निरन्तरम् इह जन्मनि शूद्रत्वं मृतः श्वा चाभिजायते ४८
Whoever continuously eats food belonging to Śūdras for one month becomes a Śūdra in this very birth and, after death, is born as a dog.

शूद्रान्नं शूद्रसस्यर्कः शूद्रेण च सहासनम् शूद्राज्ज्ञानगमः कश्चिज्ज्वलन्तमपि पातयेत् ४९
Food belonging to a Śūdra, the crops of a Śūdra, sitting together with a Śūdra, and receiving knowledge from a Śūdra can cause even one who is otherwise established in spiritual discipline to fall.

अप्रणामे तु शूद्रेऽपि स्वस्ति यो वदति द्विजः शूद्रोऽपि नरकं याति ब्राह्मणोऽपि तथैव च ५०
If a twice-born person says “svasti” to a Śūdra without receiving a respectful salutation, both the Śūdra and the Brāhmaṇa are said to go to hell.

दशाहाच्छुध्यते विप्रो द्वादशाहेन भूमिपः पाक्षिकं वैश्य एवाह शूद्रोमासेन शुध्यति ५१
A Brāhmaṇa becomes purified after ten days, a Kṣatriya after twelve days, a Vaiśya after a fortnight, and a Śūdra after one month.

--- Page 5 ---

अग्निहोत्री च यो विप्रः शूद्रान्नं चैव भोजयेत् पञ्च तस्य प्रणश्यन्ति आत्मा वेदास्त्रयोऽग्नयः ५२
And if a Brāhmaṇa who performs Agnihotra serves Śūdra food, five things of his are destroyed: his self, the Vedas, and the three sacred fires. ५२

शूद्रान्नेन तु भुक्तेन यो द्विजो जनयेत्सुतान् यस्यान्नं तस्य ते पुत्रा अन्नाच्छुक्रं प्रवर्त्तते ५३
If a twice-born person begets sons after eating Śūdra food, those sons belong to the one whose food he has eaten, for semen originates from food. ५३

शूद्रेण स्पृष्टमुच्छिष्टं प्रमादादथ पाणिना तद्विजेभ्यो न दातव्यमापस्तम्बोऽब्रवीन्मुनिः ५४
If food remnants touched by a Śūdra's hand are inadvertently obtained, they should not be given to the twice-born. So declared the sage Āpastamba. ५४

ब्राह्मणस्य सदा भुङ्गे क्षत्रियस्य च पर्वसु वैश्येष्वापत्सु भुञ्जीत न शूद्रेऽपि कदाचन ५५
One may always eat the food of a Brāhmaṇa, and the food of a Kṣatriya on festival days; in times of distress one may eat the food of a Vaiśya, but never, under any circumstances, that of a Śūdra. ५५

ब्राह्मणान्ने दरिद्रत्वं क्षत्त्रियान्ने पशुस्तथा वैश्यान्नेन तु शूद्रत्वं शूद्रान्ने नरकं ध्रुवम् ५६
Through eating the food of a Brāhmaṇa, one becomes afflicted with poverty; through the food of a Kṣatriya, one becomes an animal; through the food of a Vaiśya, one becomes a Śūdra; and through the food of a Śūdra, one certainly goes to hell. ५६

अमृतं ब्राह्मणस्यान्नं क्षत्त्रियान्नं पयः स्मृतम् वैश्यस्य चान्नमेवान्नं शूद्रान्नं रुधिरं ध्रुवम् ५७
The food of a Brāhmaṇa is regarded as nectar; the food of a Kṣatriya is regarded as milk; the food of a Vaiśya is simply food; and the food of a Śūdra is certainly regarded as blood. ५७

दुष्कृतं हि मनुष्याणामन्नमाश्नित्य तिष्ठति यो यस्यान्नं समश्नाति स तस्याश्नाति किल्विषम् ५८
The evil deeds of human beings remain in their food; whoever eats another's food eats the sins of that person. ५८

सूतकेषु यदा विप्रो ब्रह्मचारी जितेन्द्रियः पिवेत् पानीयमज्ञानाद्भुङ्गे अन्नं भक्तमथापिवा ५९
If a Brāhmaṇa who is a celibate and has conquered his senses drinks water unknowingly during a period of impurity, or eats food or cooked rice, ५९

उत्तार्याचम्य उदकमवतीर्य्य उपस्पृशेत् एवं हि समुदाचारो वरुणेनाभिमन्त्रितः ६०
he should remove himself, perform ācamana with water, enter the water and perform purification by touching it. Such is the prescribed conduct, consecrated by Varuṇa. ६०

अग्न्यागारे गवां गोष्ठे देवब्राह्मण सन्निधौ आहारे जपकाले च पादुकानां विसर्जनम् ६१
In the fire-house, in the cowshed, in the presence of deities or Brāhmaṇas, while eating, and during the time of japa, footwear must be removed. ६१

पादुकासनमारूढोगेहात्पञ्चगृहं ब्रजेत् छेदयेत्तस्य पादौ तु धार्मिकः पृथिवीपतिः ६२
One who sits upon a seat while wearing footwear should go five houses away from his home; a righteous ruler should cut off his feet. ६२

अग्निहोत्री तपस्वी च श्रोत्रियो वेदपारगः एते वै पादुकैर्य्यान्ति शेषान्दण्डेन ताडयेत् ६३
An Agnihotrin, an ascetic, a Śrotriya, and one who has mastered the Vedas—if these go about wearing footwear, the others should be struck with a stick. ६३

जन्मप्रभृतिसंस्कारे चूडान्ते भोजनं नवम् असपिण्डेन भोक्तव्यं चूडस्यान्ते विशेषतः ६४
From birth through the various saṃskāras, at the completion of the Cūḍā ceremony, the first food should be eaten by a non-Sapiṇḍa, particularly at the conclusion of the Cūḍā ceremony. ६४


--- Page 6 ---

याचकान्नं नवश्राद्धमपि सूतकभोजनम् नारीप्रथमगर्भेषु भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ६५
After eating food given by a mendicant, food from a newly performed Śrāddha, or food during a period of impurity, as well as food at the time of a woman's first pregnancy, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ६५

अन्यदत्ता तु या कन्या पुनरन्यस्य दीयते तस्याश्चान्नं न भोक्तव्यं पुनर्भूः सा प्रगीयते ६६
A maiden who, after being given to one man, is again given to another is called a Punarbhū; one should not eat food from her household. ६६

पूर्वश्च स्रावितोयश्च गर्भीयश्चाप्यसंस्कृतः द्वितीये गर्भसंस्कारस्तेन शुद्धिर्विधीयते ६७
A previously expelled pregnancy and one that has been miscarried, as well as an unpurified pregnancy, are purified through the second Garbhādhāna saṃskāra. ६७

राजाद्यैर्दशभिर्मासैर्यावत्तिष्ठति गुर्विणी तावद्रक्षा विधातव्या पुनरन्योविधीयते ६८
A pregnant woman should be protected for the ten months beginning with the king and others; thereafter, another arrangement is to be made.

भर्तृशासनमुल्लङ्घय या च स्त्री विप्रवर्त्तते तस्याश्चैव न भोक्तव्यं विज्ञेया कामचारिणी ६९
A woman who disregards her husband's authority and acts independently of him should not have food eaten from her household; she is to be regarded as one who follows her own desires.

अनपत्या तु या नारी नाश्नीयात्तद्गहेऽपि वै अथ भुङ्गे तु यो मोहात्पूयसं नरकं व्रजेत् ७०
One should not eat even in the house of a woman who is without offspring. If someone eats there out of delusion, he goes to the hell called Pūyasa.

स्त्रियाधनन्तु ये मोहादुपजीवन्ति बान्धवाः स्त्रिया यानानि वासांसि ते पापा यान्त्यधोगतिम् ७१
Those relatives who, out of delusion, live upon a woman's wealth, vehicles, or garments are sinful and go to a lower state.

राजान्नं हरते तेजः शूद्रान्नं ब्रह्मवर्चसम् सूतकेषु च यो भुङ्गे स भुङ्गे पृथिवी मलम् ७२
Food belonging to a king takes away one's radiance; food belonging to a Śūdra takes away one's spiritual splendour; and whoever eats during a period of impurity eats, as it were, the filth of the earth. ७२

इत्यङ्गिरसा महर्षिणा प्रणीतं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम् समाप्ताचेयं आङ्गिरसस्मृतिः
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra composed by the great sage Aṅgirā. Thus the Āṅgirasa Smṛti comes to an end.


