--- Page 1 ---
आपस्तम्बस्मृतिः 
श्रीगणेशाय नमः 

अथ प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Now, the first chapter.

अथ गोरोधनादिविषयेगोहत्यायां च प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Now, the description of expiation concerning the restraint and protection of cows and the killing of cows.

आपस्तम्बं प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रायश्चित्तविनिर्णयम् दूषितानां हितार्थाय वर्णानामनुपूर्वशः १
I shall now explain the determination of expiations according to the proper order of the varṇas, for the welfare of those who have transgressed. १

परेषां परिवादेषु निवृत्तमृषिसत्तमम् विविक्तदेश आसीनमात्मविद्यापरायणम् २
The great sage Āpastamba, who had withdrawn from the criticism and disputes of others, was seated in a secluded place, wholly devoted to the knowledge of the Self. २

अनन्यमनसं शान्तं सत्वस्थं योगवित्तमम् आपस्तम्बमृषिं सर्वे समेत्य मुनयोऽब्रुवन् ३
All the sages approached the ṛṣi Āpastamba, whose mind was undivided, who was peaceful, established in sattva, and highly learned in yoga, and spoke to him. ३

भगवन् मानवाः सर्वेऽसन्मार्गेऽपिस्थिता यदा चरेयुर्धर्मकार्याणां तेषां ब्रूहि विनिष्कृतिम् ४
O Bhagavan, when people, having strayed onto the wrong path, commit transgressions concerning righteous duties, tell us the proper means of expiation for them. ४

यतोऽवश्यं गृहस्थेन गवादिपरिपालनम् कृषिकर्मादि चापत्सु द्विजामन्त्रणमेव च ५
For a householder must necessarily protect cows and other animals, undertake agricultural work and related duties, and, in times of difficulty, summon or seek the assistance of the twice-born. ५

देयञ्चानाथकेऽवश्यं विप्रादीनाञ्च भेषजम् बालानां स्तन्यपानादिकार्यञ्च परिपालनम् ६
Medicine must necessarily be provided to the helpless and to Brāhmaṇas and others, and the care of children, including the provision of breast milk and other necessities, must also be undertaken. ६

एवं कृते कथञ्चित् स्यात्प्रमादो यद्यकामतः गवादीनां ततोऽस्माकं भगवन् ब्रूहि निष्कृतिम् ७
If, while performing these duties, some inadvertent mistake should somehow occur unintentionally concerning cows or other animals, O Bhagavan, tell us the appropriate means of expiation. ७

एवमुक्तः क्षणं ध्यात्वा प्रणिपातादधोमुखः दृष्ट्वा ऋषीनुवाचेदमापस्तम्बः सुनिश्चितम् ८
Thus addressed, Āpastamba meditated for a moment, bowed with his face lowered, looked upon the sages, and spoke these words with certainty. ८

बालानां स्तन्यपानादिकार्ये दोषो न विद्यते विपत्तावपि विप्राणामामन्त्रणचिकित्सने ९
There is no fault in providing children with breast milk and other necessary care, nor in summoning and treating Brāhmaṇas even in times of difficulty. ९

गवादीनां प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रायश्चित्तं रुजादिषु केचिदाहुर्न दोषोऽत्र देहधारणभेषजे १०
I shall now explain the expiation concerning cows and other animals in cases of illness and similar circumstances. Some say that there is no fault when medicine is administered for the preservation of life. १०

औषधं लवणञ्चैव स्नेहपुष्टयन्नभोजनम् प्राणिनां प्राणवृत्त्यर्थः प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते ११
Medicine, salt, nourishing food, and food intended to sustain the life of living beings are given for the preservation of their lives; therefore, no expiation is required in such cases. ११



--- Page 2 ---

अतिरिक्तं न दातव्यं काले स्वल्पन्तु दापयेत् अतिरिक्ते विपन्नानां कृच्छ्रमेव विधीयते १२
Nothing excessive should be given; at the proper time, only a small amount should be given. If animals perish because of excessive provision, the Kṛcchra expiation is prescribed. १२

त्र्यहं निरशनात् पादः पादश्चायाचितं त्र्यहम् पादः सायं त्र्यहं पादः प्रतिभोज्यं तथा त्र्यहम् १३
A quarter of the Kṛcchra consists of fasting for three days; another quarter consists of eating food obtained without asking for it for three days; another quarter consists of eating only in the evening for three days; and another quarter consists of eating food offered by others for three days. १३

प्रातः सायं दिनार्द्धञ्च पादोनं सायवर्जितम् १४
Eating once in the morning and once in the evening constitutes one portion; eating during half the day constitutes another; and eating without the evening meal constitutes the remaining portion. १४

प्रातः पादं चरेच्छूद्रः सायं वैश्यस्य दापयेत् अयाचितन्तु राजन्ये त्रिरात्रं ब्राह्मणस्य च १५
A Śūdra should perform one quarter by eating in the morning; a Vaiśya should perform it by eating in the evening; a Rājanya should perform it by eating food obtained without asking; and for a Brāhmaṇa it consists of fasting for three nights. १५

पादमेकं चरेद्रोधे द्वौ पादौ बन्धने चरेत् योजने पादहीनञ्च चरेत् सर्वं निपातने १६
For restraining a cow, one quarter of the expiation should be performed; for tying it up, two quarters; for yoking it, one quarter less; and for causing it to fall completely, the entire expiation is prescribed. १६

घण्टाभरणदोषेण गौस्तु यत्र विपद्यते चरेदर्द्धव्रतं तत्र भूषणार्थं कृतं हि तत् १७
When a cow dies because of the fault of a bell or other ornament, half of the prescribed vow should be performed, since the ornament was placed upon it for the sake of adornment. १७

दमने वा निरोधे वा संघाते चैव योजने स्तम्भशृङ्खलपाशैश्च मृते पादोनमाचरेत् १८
If a cow dies through being forcibly controlled, restrained, struck, yoked, or bound with a post, chain, or rope, one should perform an expiation of three quarters. १८

पाषाणैर्लगुडैर्वापि शस्त्रेणान्येन वा बलात् निपातयन्ति ये गास्तु तेषां सर्वं विधीयते १९
For those who forcibly cause cows to fall using stones, clubs, weapons, or any other means, the complete expiation is prescribed. १९

प्राजापत्यं चरेद्विप्रः पादोनं क्षत्रियश्चरेत् कृच्छ्रार्द्धन्तु चरेद्वैश्यः पादं शूद्रस्य दापयेत् २०
A Brāhmaṇa should perform the Prājāpatya expiation; a Kṣatriya should perform three quarters of it; a Vaiśya should perform half of the Kṛcchra; and a Śūdra should be assigned one quarter. २०

द्वौ मासौ दापयेद्वत्सं द्वौ मासौ द्वौ स्तनौ दुहेत् द्वौ मासावेकवेलायां शेषकाले यथारुचि २१
For two months the calf should be allowed to drink; for the next two months milk should be drawn from both udders; for another two months it should be milked only once a day; thereafter, it may be milked according to one’s preference. २१

दशरात्रार्द्धमासेन गौस्तु यत्र विपद्यते सशिखं वपनं कृत्वा प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् २२
When a cow dies within ten nights or half a month, one should shave the hair leaving the śikhā and perform the Prājāpatya expiation. २२

हलमष्टगवं धर्मं षड्गवं जीवितार्थिनाम् चतुर्गवं नृशंसानां द्विगवञ्च जिघांसिनाम् २३
For righteous purposes, a plough may be drawn by eight cows; for those seeking livelihood, by six cows; for the cruel, by four cows; and for those intent on causing harm, by two cows. २३

अतिवाहातिदोहाभ्यां नासिकाभेदने तथा नदीपर्वतसंरोधे मृते पादोनमाचरेत् २४
If a cow dies because of excessive carrying, excessive milking, piercing of the nose, or obstruction caused by rivers or mountains, three quarters of the prescribed expiation should be performed. २४



--- Page 3 ---

न नारिकेलबालाभ्यां न मुञ्जेन न चर्मणा एभिर्गास्तु न बघ्नीयाद्वद्ध्वा परवशोभवेत् २५
One should not bind cows with coconut fibre, muñja grass, or leather; having been bound with these, they may become helpless and subject to harm. २५

कुशैः काशैश्च बघ्नीयाद्वषभं दक्षिणामुखम् पादलग्नाग्निदोषेषु प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते २६
A bull should be bound with kuśa or kāśa grass, facing south. There is no penance prescribed for defects caused by fire accidentally adhering to the feet. २६

व्यापन्नानां बहूनान्तु रोधने बन्धनेऽपि च भिषङ्गिथ्योपचारे च द्विगुणं गोव्रतञ्चरेत् २७
If many cows perish through restraint, confinement, or improper medical treatment, one should perform twice the prescribed go-vrata. २७

शृङ्गभङ्गेऽस्थिभङ्गे च लाङ्गलस्य च कर्त्तने सप्तरात्रं पिबेदुग्धं यावत्स्वस्था पुनर्भवेत् २८
In the case of broken horns, broken bones, or injury to the tail, one should drink milk for seven nights, until the cow becomes healthy again. २८

गोमूत्रेण तु संमिश्र यावकं भक्षयेद्विजः एतद्विमिश्रितं चैव मुक्तञ्चोशनसा स्वयम् २९
A Brāhmaṇa should eat barley mixed with cow's urine; this mixture itself is prescribed, and Uśanas has declared it to be the means of purification. २९

देवद्रोण्यां विहारेषु कूपेष्वायतनेषु च एषु गोषु विपन्नासु प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते ३०
If cows perish in sacred places, pleasure gardens, wells, or religious sanctuaries, no penance is prescribed. ३०

एका पादात्तु बहुभिर्दैवाद्व्यापादिता क्वचित् पादं पादन्तु हत्यायाश्चरेयुस्ते पृथक्पृथक् ३१
If one cow is accidentally killed by many persons, each of them should separately perform one quarter of the penance for killing a cow. ३१

यन्त्रणे गोश्चिकित्सार्थे मूढगर्भविमोचने यत्ने कृते विपत्तिश्चेत्प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते ३२
If a cow dies while efforts are being made to restrain it for medical treatment or to remove a difficult or obstructed fetus, no penance is prescribed. ३२

सरोमं प्रथमे पादे द्वितीये श्मश्रुकर्त्तनम् तृतीये तु शिखा धार्य्या सशिखन्तु निपातने ३३
For the first quarter, the hair is left intact; for the second, the beard is shaved; for the third, the śikhā is retained; and for the complete penance, the head is shaved leaving the śikhā. ३३

सर्वान्केशान् समुद्धत्य छेदयेदङ्गुलिद्वयम् एवमेव तु नारीणां शिरसो मुण्डनं स्मृतम् ३४
Having gathered all the hair, one should cut it to the extent of two finger-breadths. In the same manner, shaving of the head of women is prescribed. ३४

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the First Chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Now, the Second Chapter.

अथ शुद्धयशुद्धिविवेकवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the distinction between purity and impurity.

कारुहस्तगतं पुण्यं यच्च ग्रामाद्विनिःस्मृतम् स्त्रीबालवृद्धाचरितं प्रत्यक्षादृष्टमेव च १
Whatever merit is associated with the hands of artisans, whatever has come out from the village, whatever is performed by women, children, and the elderly, and whatever is directly seen or perceived— १

--- Page 4 ---

प्रपास्वरण्येषु जलेऽथ नीरे द्रोण्यां जलं यच्च विनिःसृतं भवेत् श्वपाकचाण्डालपरिग्रहेषु पीत्वा जलं पञ्चगव्येन शुद्धिः २
Water from drinking places, forest streams, reservoirs, and water that has flowed out from a trough, if it has been taken into the possession of Śvapākas or Caṇḍālas, becomes pure by drinking Pañcagavya. २

न दुष्येत्सन्तता धारा वातोद्धूताश्च रेणवः स्त्रियो वृद्धाश्च बालाश्च न दुष्यन्ति कदाचन ३
A continuously flowing stream does not become impure, nor do particles of dust raised by the wind. Women, the elderly, and children are likewise never considered impure. ३

आत्मशय्या च वस्त्रञ्च जायापत्यं कमण्डलुः आत्मनः शुचिरेतानि परेषामशुचीनि तु ४
One's own bed, clothing, wife and children, and water-pot are pure for oneself, but they are impure for others. ४

अन्यैस्तु खानिताः कूपास्तडागानि तथैव च एषु स्त्रात्वा च पीत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ५
Wells and ponds dug by others are likewise treated in this manner; after bathing in them and drinking their water, one becomes purified by Pañcagavya. ५

उच्छिष्टमशुचित्वञ्च यच्च विष्ठानुलेपनम् सर्वं शुध्यति तोयेन तत्तोयं केन शुध्यति ६
Food remnants, impurity, and whatever has been smeared with excrement are all cleansed by water; but by what is that water itself purified? ६

सूर्य्यरश्मिनिपातेन मारुतस्पर्शनेन च गवां मूत्रपुरीषेण तत्तोयं तेन शुध्यति ७
That water is purified by the rays of the sun, by contact with the wind, and by the urine and dung of cows; by these means the water becomes pure. ७

अस्थिचर्मादियुक्तन्तु खराश्वोष्ट्रोपदूषितम् उद्धरेदुदकं सर्वं शोधनं परिमार्जनम् ८
If water has been polluted by bones, skin, or similar substances, or by donkeys, horses, or camels, all the water should be removed; purification is accomplished by thoroughly cleansing it. ८

कूपो मूत्रपुरीषेण ष्ठीवनेनापि दूषितः श्वशृगालखरोष्ट्रैश्च क्रव्यादैश्च जुगुप्सितः ९
A well polluted by urine, excrement, or spittle, or defiled by dogs, jackals, donkeys, camels, or other flesh-eating creatures, is considered impure. ९

उद्धृत्यैव च तत्तोयं सप्तपिण्डान् समुद्धरेत् पञ्चगव्यं मृदा पूतं कूपे तच्छोधनं स्मृतम् १०
The water should be removed, and seven lumps of earth should likewise be taken out. Pañcagavya purified with earth should then be put into the well; this is prescribed as its purification. १०

बापीकूपतडागानां दूषितानाञ्च शोधनम् कुम्भानां शतमुद्धत्य पञ्चगव्यं ततः क्षिपेत् ११
For the purification of polluted reservoirs, wells, and ponds, one hundred pots of water should be removed, after which Pañcagavya should be poured into them. ११

यश्च कूपात्पिबेत्र्त्तायं ब्राह्मणः शवदूषितात् कथं तत्र विशुद्धिः स्यादिति मे संशयो भवेत् १२
If a Brāhmaṇa drinks water from a well polluted by a corpse, how can purification be accomplished there? This is my doubt. १२

अक्लिन्नेनाप्यभिन्नेन शवेन परिदूषिते पीत्वा कूपे ह्यहोरात्रं पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १३
If the well has been polluted by a corpse that is neither decomposed nor dismembered, one who has drunk from it becomes purified by observing a day and night and taking Pañcagavya. १३

क्लिन्ने भिन्ने शवे चैव तत्रस्थं यदि तत् पिबेत् शुद्धिश्चान्द्रायणं तस्य तप्तकृच्छ्रमथापि वा १४
But if the corpse is decomposed or dismembered and someone drinks the water in which it lies, purification requires the Cāndrāyaṇa penance or, alternatively, the Tapta-Kṛcchra penance. १४

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.



--- Page 5 ---

अथ तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Now, the Third Chapter.

गृहेऽविज्ञातस्यान्त्यजातेनिवेशने बालादिविषये च प्रायश्चित्तम्
Expiation concerning the residence of an unknown Antyaja in a house and concerning children and others.

अन्त्यजातिमविज्ञातो निवसेद्यश्च वेश्मनि सम्यग्ज्ञात्वा तु कालेन द्विजाः कुर्वन्त्यनुग्रहम् १
If one whose Antyaja caste is unknown resides in a house, then, after properly ascertaining the matter, the twice-born should in due course grant him consideration. १

चान्द्रायणं पराको वा द्विजातीनां विशोधनम् प्राजापत्यन्तु शूद्रस्य शेषं तदनुसारतः २
For the twice-born, purification is accomplished by the Cāndrāyaṇa or Parāka penance; for a Śūdra, the Prājāpatya is prescribed, and for the others, the corresponding penance according to their respective status. २

यैर्भुक्तं तत्र पक्वान्नं कृच्छ्रं तेषां प्रदापयेत् तेषामपि च यैर्भुक्तं कृच्छ्रपादं प्रदापयेत् ३
Those who ate cooked food there should undertake the Kṛcchra penance; those who merely ate food associated with them should undertake one quarter of the Kṛcchra. ३

कूपैकपानैर्दुष्टानां स्पर्शने शवदूषणम् तेषामेकोपवासेन पञ्चगव्येन शोधनम् ४
For those who have been defiled by drinking from the same well or by contact with a corpse, purification is accomplished by a single fast and by taking Pañcagavya. ४

बालो वृद्धस्तथा रोगी गर्भिणी वाऽपि पीडिता तेषां नक्तं प्रदातव्यं बालानां प्रहरद्वयम् ५
For a child, an elderly person, a sick person, or a pregnant woman who is afflicted, food should be given at night; for children, it should be given after two watches of the day. ५

अशीतिर्यस्य वर्षाणि वालोवाप्यूनषोडशः प्रायश्चित्ताद्ध मर्हन्ति स्त्रियो व्याधित एव च ६
One who is eighty years old, a child below sixteen, women, and the sick are entitled to half of the prescribed expiation. ६

न्यूनकादशवर्षस्य पञ्चवर्षाधिकस्य च चरेद्गुरुः सुहृद्वापि प्रायश्चित्तं विशोधनम् ७
For one younger than eleven years or older than five years, the teacher or a close friend should perform the prescribed expiation for purification. ७

अथवा क्रियमाणेषु येषामार्त्तिः प्रदृश्यते शेषसम्पादनाच्छुद्धिर्विपत्तिर्न भवेद्यथा ८
Alternatively, when distress is seen to arise among those performing the penance, purification should be completed by fulfilling the remaining portion, so that no harm may occur. ८

क्षुधा व्याधितकायानां प्राणो येषां विपद्यते ये न रक्षन्ति भक्तेन तेषां तत्किल्विषं भवेत् ९
When the lives of those weakened by hunger or illness are endangered, those who fail to preserve them with food incur that sin. ९

पूर्णेऽपि कालनियमे न शुद्धिर्बाह्मणैर्विना अपूर्णेष्वपि कालेषु शोधयन्ति द्विजोत्तमाः १०
Even when the prescribed period has been completed, there is no purification without the Brāhmaṇas; and even before the prescribed period is complete, the best of the twice-born may perform the purification. १०

समाप्तमिति नो वाच्यं त्रिषु वर्णेषु कर्हिचित् विप्रसम्पादनं कार्यमुत्पन्ने प्राणसंशये ११
One should never say “it is finished” in the case of the three varṇas; when danger to life arises, the Brāhmaṇa should bring the matter to completion. ११

सम्पादयन्ति यद्विप्राः स्नानतीर्थं फलञ्च तत् सम्यक्कर्तुरपापं स्याद्वती च फलमाप्नुयात् १२
Whatever the Brāhmaṇas accomplish as a bathing pilgrimage and its fruit, that becomes properly effective; the performer becomes free from sin and obtains the corresponding fruit. १२

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.



--- Page 6 ---


अथ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Now, the Fourth Chapter.

अथ चाण्डालकूपजलपानादौ पानादिषूदक्यादिसंस्पर्शे च प्रायश्चित्तं
Now, the expiation for drinking water from a Caṇḍāla's well and for contact with an Udakyā and others during drinking and other activities.

चाण्डालकूपभाण्डेषु योऽज्ञानात्पिबते जलम् प्रायश्चित्तं कथं तस्य वर्णे वर्णे विधीयते १
If someone unknowingly drinks water from a Caṇḍāla's well or vessel, what expiation is prescribed for him according to each varṇa? १

चरेत्सान्तपनं विप्रः प्राजापत्यन्तु भूमिपः तदर्द्धन्तु चरेद्वैश्यः पादं शूद्रस्य दापयेत् ३
A Brāhmaṇa should perform the Sāntapana penance; a Kṣatriya should perform the Prājāpatya; a Vaiśya should perform half of that; and a Śūdra should perform one quarter. ३

भुक्त्वोच्छिष्टस्त्वनाचान्तश्चाण्डालैः श्वपचेन वा प्रमादात्स्पर्शनं गच्छेत्तत्र कुर्याद्विशोधनम् ४
If, after eating remnants and without having performed ācamana, one accidentally comes into contact with a Caṇḍāla or Śvapāka, one should undertake the prescribed purification. ४

गायत्र्यष्टसहस्रन्तु द्रुपदां वा शतं जपेत् जपं त्रिरात्रमनश्नन् पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ५
He should recite the Gāyatrī eight thousand times, or the Drupadā mantras one hundred times; after reciting them while fasting for three nights, he becomes purified by taking Pañcagavya. ५

चाण्डालेन यदा स्पृष्टो विण्मूत्रे च कृते द्विजः प्रायश्चित्तं त्रिरात्रं स्याद्भुक्त्वोच्छिष्टः षडाचरेत् ६
When a twice-born person is touched by a Caṇḍāla, or when he comes into contact with excrement or urine, he should perform a three-night penance; if he has eaten remnants, he should perform it for six nights. ६

पानमैथुनसम्पर्क तथा मूत्रपुरीषयोः सम्पर्क यदि गच्छेत्तु उदक्या चान्त्यजैस्तथा ७
If one comes into contact with an Udakyā or an Antyaja through drinking, sexual intercourse, or contact with urine or excrement— ७

एतैरेव यदा स्पृष्टः प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् भोजने च त्रिरात्रं स्यात्पाने तु त्र्यहमेव च ८
If one is touched by them in these very circumstances, the prescribed expiation is as follows: for eating, three nights; and for drinking, three days. ८

मैथुने पादकृच्छ्रं स्यात्तथा मूत्रपुरीषयोः दिनमेकं तथा मूत्रे पुरीषे तु दिनत्रयम् ९
For sexual contact, a quarter-Kṛcchra should be performed; for contact with urine or excrement, one day; and for contact specifically with urine or excrement, three days. ९

एकाहं तत्र निर्दिष्टं दन्तधावनभक्षणे १०
For tooth-cleaning and eating in such circumstances, one day is prescribed. १०

वृक्षारूढे तु चाण्डाले द्विजस्तत्रैव तिष्ठति फलानि भक्षयेत्तस्य कथं शुद्धिं विनिर्दिशेत् ११
If a Caṇḍāla has climbed a tree and a twice-born person remains there and eats its fruits, what purification should be prescribed for him? ११

ब्राह्मणान्समनुज्ञाप्य सवासाः स्त्रानमाचरेत् एकरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १२
After obtaining permission from Brāhmaṇas, he should bathe while wearing his clothes; having fasted for one night, he becomes purified by taking Pañcagavya. १२

येन केनचिदुच्छिष्टो अमेध्यं स्पृशति द्विजः अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १३
If a twice-born person touches, after eating remnants from anyone, something impure, he becomes purified by fasting for a day and a night and taking Pañcagavya. १३

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.


--- Page 7 ---

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Now, the Fifth Chapter.

अथ वैश्यान्त्यजश्वकाकोच्छिष्टभोजनेप्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Now, the description of expiation for eating food contaminated by Vaiśyas, Antyajas, dogs, and crows.

चाण्डालेन यदा स्पृष्टो द्विजवर्णः कदाचन अनभ्युक्ष्य पिवेत्तोयं प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् १
If a twice-born person is ever touched by a Caṇḍāla and drinks water without sprinkling it for purification, what expiation should be performed? १

ब्राह्मणस्तु त्रिरात्रेण पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति क्षत्त्रियस्तु द्विरात्रेण पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति २
A Brāhmaṇa becomes purified by taking Pañcagavya after fasting for three nights; a Kṣatriya becomes purified by taking Pañcagavya after fasting for two nights. २

चतुर्थस्य तो वर्णस्य प्रायश्चित्तं न वै भवेत् व्रतं नास्ति तपो नास्ति होमो नैव च विद्यते ३
For the fourth varṇa, no such expiation is prescribed; there is no vow, no austerity, and no sacrificial offering prescribed in this regard. ३

पञ्चगव्यं न दातव्यं तस्य मन्त्रविवर्जनात् ख्यापयित्वा द्विजानान्तु शूद्रो दानेन शुध्यति ४
Pañcagavya should not be given to him because he is without the prescribed mantras; after declaring the matter before the twice-born, a Śūdra becomes purified through giving gifts. ४

ब्राह्मणस्य यदोच्छिष्टमश्नात्यज्ञानतो द्विजः अहोरात्रन्तु गायत्र्या जपं कृत्वा विशुध्यति ५
If a twice-born person unknowingly eats the remnants of a Brāhmaṇa, he becomes purified by reciting the Gāyatrī for a day and a night. ५

उच्छिष्टं वैश्यजातीनां भुङ्गे ज्ञानाद्विजो यदि शङ्खपुष्पीपयः पीत्वा त्रिरात्रेणैव शुध्यति ६
If a twice-born person knowingly eats the remnants of a Vaiśya, he becomes purified by drinking the milk of Śaṅkhapuṣpī and observing a three-night penance. ६

ब्राह्मण्या सह योऽश्नीयादुच्छिष्टं वा कदाचन न तत्र दोषं मन्यन्ते नित्यमेव मनीषिणः ७
If anyone eats with a Brāhmaṇa woman or eats her remnants, the wise do not consider there to be any fault in this at any time. ७

उच्चिष्टमितरस्त्रीणामश्नीयात् पिवतेऽपिवा प्राजापत्येन शुद्धिः स्याद्भगवानङ्गिराब्रवीत् ८
If he eats or drinks the remnants of other women, purification is accomplished through the Prājāpatya penance; thus declared the venerable Aṅgirā. ८

अन्त्यानां भुक्तशेषन्तु भक्षयित्वा द्विजातयः चान्द्रायणं तदर्द्धार्द्धं ब्रह्मक्षत्त्रविशां विधिः ९
If the twice-born eat the remnants of food belonging to the Antyajas, they should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance; for Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas, the prescribed measure is correspondingly reduced by half. ९

विण्मूत्रभक्षणे विप्रस्तप्तकृच्छ्रं समाचरेत् श्वकाकोच्छिष्टभोगे च प्राजापत्यविधिः स्मृतः १०
For consuming excrement or urine, a Brāhmaṇa should perform the Tapta-Kṛcchra penance; for eating the remnants of a dog or crow, the Prājāpatya penance is prescribed. १०

उच्छिष्टः स्पृशते विप्रो यदि कश्चिदकामतः शुनः कुक्कुटशूद्रांश्च मद्यभाण्डं तथैव च ११
If a Brāhmaṇa accidentally touches the remnants of a dog, a chicken, a Śūdra, or a vessel containing liquor— ११

पक्षिणाधिष्ठितं यच्च यदमेध्यं कदाचन अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १२
Or anything occupied by a bird, or anything impure, he becomes purified by fasting for a day and a night and taking Pañcagavya. १२

वैश्येन च यदा स्पृष्ट उच्छिष्टेन कदाचन स्त्रानं जपञ्च त्रैकाल्यं दिनस्यान्ते विशुध्यति १३
If he is ever touched by the remnants of a Vaiśya, he becomes purified by bathing and reciting the prescribed prayers three times a day, and is purified at the end of the day. १३

विप्रोविप्रेण संस्पृष्ट उच्छिष्टेन कदाचन स्त्रात्वाचम्य विशुद्धः स्यादापस्तम्बोऽब्रवीन्मुनिः १४
If a Brāhmaṇa is ever touched by the remnants of another Brāhmaṇa, he becomes purified simply by bathing and performing ācamana; thus declared the sage Āpastamba. १४

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.



--- Page 8 ---

षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Now, the sixth Chapter.

अथ नीलीवस्त्रधारणे नीलीभक्षणे प्रायश्चित्तम् 
Now, the description of expiation for wearing blue cloths and consuming neel

अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि नीलीवस्त्रस्य यो विधिः स्त्रीणां क्रीडाथसम्भोगे शयनीये न दुष्यति १
From this point onward, I shall explain the rule concerning blue-dyed garments. They do not cause impurity when used by women for play, sexual union, or sleeping. १

पालने विक्रये चैव तद्वत्तेरुपजीवने पतितस्तु भवेद्विप्र स्त्रिभिः कृच्छ्रेर्विशुध्यति २
Likewise, there is no fault in preserving or selling such garments, or in earning one's livelihood through them; but a Brāhmaṇa who engages in such occupations becomes fallen and is purified by performing three Kṛcchra penances. २

स्त्रानं दानं तपोहोमः स्वाध्यायः पितृतपणम् पञ्चयज्ञा वृथा तस्य नीलीवस्त्रस्य धारणात् ३
Bathing, charity, austerity, fire offerings, Vedic study, offerings to the ancestors, and the five great sacrifices become fruitless for one who wears blue-dyed garments. ३

नीलीरक्तं यदा वस्त्रं ब्राह्मणोऽङ्गेषु धारयेत् अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ४
When a Brāhmaṇa wears a garment dyed blue on his body, he should fast for a day and night and become purified by consuming Pañcagavya. ४

रोमकूपैर्यदा गच्छेद्रसो नील्यास्तु कर्हिचित् पतितस्तु भवेद्विप्रस्त्रिभिः कृच्छ्रेर्विशुध्यति ५
If the dye of blue colouring ever enters the pores of the body, the Brāhmaṇa becomes fallen and is purified by performing three Kṛcchra penances. ५

नीलीदारु यदा भिन्द्याद् ब्राह्मणस्य शरीरकम् शोणितं दृश्यते तत्र द्विजश्चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ६
If a piece of blue-dyed wood injures the body of a Brāhmaṇa and blood is seen, the twice-born should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ६

नीलीमध्ये यदा गच्छेत्प्रमादाद्ब्राह्मणः क्वचित् अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ७
If a Brāhmaṇa accidentally enters a place where blue dye is present, he should fast for a day and night and become purified by consuming Pañcagavya. ७

नीलीरक्तेन वस्त्रेण यदन्नमुपनीयते अभोज्यं तद्विजातीनां भुक्त्वा चन्द्रायणं चरेत् ८
Food that is served in a garment dyed blue is unfit for consumption by the twice-born; if they eat it, they should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ८

भक्षयेद्यस्य नीलीन्तु प्रमादाद् ब्राह्मणः क्वचित् चान्द्रायणेन शुद्धिः स्यादापस्तम्बोऽब्रवीन्मुनिः ९
If a Brāhmaṇa accidentally consumes the blue dye itself, he is purified by performing the Cāndrāyaṇa penance; so declared the sage Āpastamba. ९

यावत्यां वापिता नीली तावती चाशुचिर्मही प्रमाणं द्वादशाब्दानि अत ऊर्ध्वं शुचिर्भवेत् १०
For as long as blue dye remains cultivated in a particular area, that land is considered impure; the prescribed period is twelve years, after which it becomes pure. १०

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.



--- Page 9 ---


अथ सप्तमोऽध्यायः
The seventh chapter begins.

अन्त्यजादिस्पर्शेरजस्वलायाः विवाहादिषु कन्याया रजोदर्शने प्रायश्चित्तम् ।
Expiation for the touching of a menstruating woman by an Antyaja and others, and for menstruation occurring in a maiden at the time of marriage and other such occasions.

स्त्रानं रजस्वलायास्तु चतुर्थेऽहनि शस्यते वृत्ते रजसि गम्या स्त्री नानिवृत्ते कथञ्चन १
Bathing is prescribed for a menstruating woman on the fourth day. When the menstrual flow has ceased, she may approach her husband; under no circumstances should she be approached before it has ceased. १

रोगेण यद्रजः स्त्रीणामत्यर्थं हि प्रवर्तते अशुद्धास्तु न तेनेह तासां वैकारिकं हि तत् २
When menstrual bleeding in women occurs excessively because of illness, they are not thereby considered impure, for that condition is caused by disorder. २

साध्वाचारा न सा तावद्रजो यावत्प्रवर्तते वृत्ते रजसि साध्वी स्याद्गहकर्म्मणि चैन्द्रिये ३
A woman is not considered of proper conduct for as long as the menstrual flow continues. Once the flow has ceased, she becomes pure and may engage in household duties and sexual relations. ३

प्रथमेऽहनि चाण्डाली द्वितीये ब्रह्मघातिनी तृतीये रजकी प्रोक्ता चतुर्थहनि शुध्यति ४
On the first day she is said to be like a Caṇḍālī, on the second like one who has committed Brāhmaṇa-killing, and on the third like a washerwoman; on the fourth day she becomes purified. ४

अन्त्यजातिश्वपाकेन संस्पृष्टा वै रजस्वला अहानि तान्यतिकम्य प्रायश्चित्तं प्रकल्पयेत् ५
If a menstruating woman is touched by an Antyaja or a Śvapāka, she should, after those days have passed, undertake the prescribed expiation. ५

त्रिरात्रमुपवासः स्यात्पञ्चगव्यं विशोधनम् निशां प्राप्य तु तां योनिं प्रजाकारञ्च कारयेत् ६
She should fast for three nights, and Pañcagavya is prescribed for purification. After nightfall, she should undergo the prescribed purification of the sexual organ and perform the required cleansing. ६

रजस्वलां त्यजेत् स्पृष्टां शुना च श्वपचेन च त्रिरात्रोपोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ७
A menstruating woman who has been touched by a dog or a Śvapāka should be kept apart; after fasting for three nights, she becomes purified by consuming Pañcagavya. ७

प्रथमेऽहनि षड्रात्रं द्वितीये तु त्र्यहन्तथा तृतीये चोपवासस्तु चतुर्थे वह्निदर्शनात् ८
If this occurs on the first day, a six-night penance is prescribed; on the second day, a three-day penance; on the third day, fasting; and on the fourth day, purification is obtained by seeing the sacred fire. ८



--- Page 10 ---

विवाहे वितते यज्ञे संस्कारे च कृते तथा रजस्वला भवेत् कन्या संस्कारस्तु कथं भवेत् ९
If a maiden becomes menstruating during a wedding, an ongoing sacrifice, or after a rite of consecration has been performed, how should the rite be completed? ९

स्त्रापयित्वा तदा कन्यामन्यैर्वस्त्रैरलङ्कृताम् पुनः प्रत्याहुतिं हुत्वाशेषं कर्म्म समाचरेत् १०
The maiden should then be bathed and adorned with other garments. After offering the remaining oblation, the rest of the rite should be completed. १०

रजस्वला तु संस्पृष्टा प्लवकुक्कुटवायसैः सा त्रिरात्रोपवासेन पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ११
If a menstruating woman is touched by a waterfowl, a chicken, or a crow, she becomes purified by fasting for three nights and consuming Pañcagavya. ११

उच्छिष्टेन तु संस्पृष्टा कदाचित्स्त्री रजस्वला कृच्छ्रेण शुद्धते विप्रस्तथा दानेन शुध्यति १२
If a menstruating woman is touched by the remnants of food, she is purified through a Kṛcchra penance; a Brāhmaṇa is purified in the same circumstance through charity. १२

एकशाखासमारूढा चाण्डाला वा रजस्वला ब्राह्मणेन समं तत्र सवासाः स्त्रानमाचरेत् १३
If a menstruating woman, whether a Caṇḍālī or otherwise, has ascended the same branch as a Brāhmaṇa, he should bathe there while fully clothed. १३

रजस्वलायाः संस्पर्श कथञ्चिज्जायते शुना रजोदिनात्तु यच्छेषस्तदुपोष्य विशुध्यति १४
If a menstruating woman is somehow touched by a dog, she becomes purified by fasting for the remainder of the days of her menstruation. १४

अशक्ता चोपवासे तु स्त्रानं पश्चात् समाचरेत् तत्राप्यशक्ता चैकेन पञ्चगव्यं पिबेत्ततः १५
If she is unable to undertake the fast, she should bathe afterward. If she is unable even to do that, she should consume one measure of Pañcagavya. १५

उच्छिष्टस्तु यदा विप्रः स्पृशेन्मद्यं रजस्वलाम् मद्यं स्पृष्ट्वा चरेत्कृच्छ्रं तदर्द्धन्तु रजस्वलाम् १६
If a Brāhmaṇa, having remnants of food upon him, touches liquor or a menstruating woman, he should perform a Kṛcchra penance for touching the liquor, while the menstruating woman should perform half of that penance. १६

उदक्यां सूतिकां विप्र उच्छिष्टः स्पृशते यदि कृच्छ्रार्द्धन्तु चरेद्विप्रः प्रायश्चित्तं विशोधनम् १७
If a Brāhmaṇa with food remnants upon him touches a menstruating or recently delivered woman, he should perform half of a Kṛcchra penance as purification. १७

चाण्डालैः श्वपचैर्वापि आत्रेयी स्पृशते यदि शेषाहात्फालकृष्टेन पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १८
If an Ātreyī is touched by a Caṇḍāla or a Śvapāka, she becomes purified by consuming Pañcagavya after the remaining period, following the prescribed purification. १८

उदक्या ब्राह्मणी शूद्रामुदक्यां स्पृशते यदि अहोरात्रोषिता भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १९
If a menstruating Brāhmaṇa woman touches a menstruating Śūdra woman, she becomes purified by fasting for a day and night and consuming Pañcagavya. १९

एवञ्च क्षत्रियां वैश्यां ब्राह्मणी चेद्रजस्वलाम् सचेलप्लवनं कृत्वा दिनस्यान्ते घृतं पिबेत् २०
Likewise, if a menstruating Brāhmaṇa woman touches a Kṣatriya or Vaiśya woman, she should bathe while clothed and, at the end of the day, drink ghee. २०

सवर्णेषु तु नारीणां सद्यः स्त्रानं विधीयते एवमेव विशुद्धिः स्यादापस्तम्बोऽब्रवीन्मुनिः २१
Among women of the same varṇa, immediate bathing is prescribed; in this way purification is accomplished, as the sage Āpastamba declared. २१

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे सप्तमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.


--- Page 11 ---

अथ अष्टमोऽध्यायः
The eighth chapter begins.

सुरादिदूषितकांस्यशुद्धिविधानवर्णनम्
Description of the prescribed methods for purifying bronze vessels contaminated by liquor and other substances.

भस्मना शुध्यते कांस्यं सुरया यन्न लिप्यते सुराविण्मूत्रसंस्पृष्टं शुध्यते तापलेखनैः १
Bronze is purified with ashes; that which has been smeared with liquor is purified by cleansing; and bronze touched by liquor, feces, or urine is purified by heating and scraping. १

गवाव्रातानि कांस्यानि शुद्धोच्छिष्टानि यानि तु दशभिः क्षारैः शुध्यन्ति श्वकाकोपहतानि च २
Bronze vessels that have been touched by herds of cattle, as well as those polluted by food remnants, are purified with ten kinds of alkaline substances; so too are those contaminated by dogs or crows. २

शौचं सुवर्णनारीणां वायुसूर्येन्दुरश्मिभिः ३
Gold and women are purified by exposure to the rays of the wind, the sun, and the moon. ३

रेतस्पृष्टं शवस्पृष्टमाविकन्तु प्रदुष्यति अद्भिर्मृदा च तन्मात्रं प्रक्षाल्य च विशुध्यति ४
Wool becomes impure when touched by semen or a corpse; it becomes purified simply by washing it with water and earth. ४

शुद्धमन्नमविप्रस्य पञ्चरात्रेण जीर्य्यति अन्नं व्यञ्जनसंयुक्तमर्द्धमासेन जीर्य्यति ५
Pure food belonging to a non-Brāhmaṇa is digested in five nights; food accompanied by vegetables and other preparations is digested in half a month. ५

पयस्तु दधि मासेन षण्मासेन घृतं तथा सम्वत्सरेण तैलन्तु कोष्ठे जीर्य्यति वा नवा ६
Milk is digested in a month, curds in six months, ghee likewise in six months, and oil in a year—or perhaps it may not be digested in the stomach at all. ६

भुञ्जते ये तु शूद्रान्नं मासमेकं निरन्तरम् इह जन्मनि शूद्रत्वं जायन्ते ते मृताः शुनि ७
Those who continually eat Śūdra food for one month become Śūdras in this life and, after death, are born as dogs. ७

शूद्रान्नं शूद्रसम्पर्कः शूद्रेणैव सहासनम् शूद्रात् ज्ञानागमः कञ्चिज्ज्वलन्तमपि पातयेत् ८
Śūdra food, association with Śūdras, sitting together with a Śūdra, and receiving knowledge from a Śūdra can cause even one who is spiritually radiant to fall. ८

आहित्याग्निस्तु योविप्रः शूद्रान्नान्न निवर्तते तथा तस्य प्रणश्यन्ति आत्मा ब्रह्म त्रयोऽग्नयः ९
A Brāhmaṇa who has established the sacred fires but does not abstain from Śūdra food thereby causes his Self, Brahman, and his three sacred fires to perish. ९

शूद्रान्नेन तु भुक्तेन मैथुनं योऽधिगच्छति यस्यान्नं तस्य ते पुत्रा ह्यन्याच्छुक्रस्य सम्भवः १०
If one engages in sexual union after eating Śūdra food, the children born from him are regarded as belonging to the one whose food he has eaten, arising from another's seed. १०

शूद्रान्नेनोदरस्थेन यः कश्चिन्प्रियते द्विजः स भवेच्छूकरो ग्राम्यो मृतः श्वा वाथ जायते ११
If a twice-born person dies while Śūdra food remains in his stomach, he is born as a village pig, or after death he may be born as a dog. ११


--- Page 12 ---

ब्राह्मणस्य सदा भुङ्गे क्षत्रियस्य तु पर्वणि वैश्यस्य यज्ञदीक्षायां शूद्रस्य न कदाचन १२
One should always eat the food of a Brāhmaṇa; that of a Kṣatriya only on festival days; that of a Vaiśya at the initiation into a sacrifice; but that of a Śūdra should never be eaten. १२

अमृतं ब्राह्मणस्यान्नं क्षत्रियस्य पयः स्मृतम् वैश्यस्याप्यन्नमेवान्नं शूद्रस्य रुधिरं स्मृतम् १३
The food of a Brāhmaṇa is considered nectar; the milk of a Kṣatriya is likewise prescribed; the food of a Vaiśya is simply regarded as food; while the food of a Śūdra is considered blood. १३

वैश्वदेवेन होमेन देवताभ्यच्चनैर्जपैः अमृतं तेन विप्रान्नमृग्यजुःसामसंस्कृतम् १४
Through the Vaiśvadeva offering, fire sacrifice, worship of the deities, and recitation of sacred formulas, the food of a Brāhmaṇa becomes nectar, being sanctified by the Ṛg, Yajur, and Sāma Vedas. १४

व्यवहारानुरूपेण धर्मेण च्छलवर्जितम् क्षत्रियस्य पयस्तेन भूतानां यच्च पालनम् १५
Through conduct appropriate to his station, through righteousness and without deceit, the milk of the Kṣatriya becomes sanctified, as does the protection and maintenance of living beings. १५

स्वकर्मणा च वृषभैरनुसृत्याद्यशक्तितः खलयज्ञातिथित्वेन वैश्यान्नन्तेन संस्कृतम् १६
Through his own duties, by following the oxen and by laboring according to his ability, and through the offering at the threshing floor and the honoring of guests, the food of the Vaiśya becomes sanctified. १६

अज्ञानतिमिरान्धस्य मद्यपानरतस्य च रुधिरं तेन शूद्रान्नं विधिमन्त्रविवर्जितम् १७
For one blinded by the darkness of ignorance and addicted to drinking liquor, the food of the Śūdra is like blood, being devoid of prescribed rites and sacred mantras. १७

आममांसं मधु घृतं धानाः क्षीरं तथैव च गुडं तक्रं समं ग्राह्यं निवृत्तेनापि शूद्रतः १८
Raw meat, honey, ghee, grains, milk, jaggery, and buttermilk may equally be accepted from a Śūdra, even by one who has renounced worldly pursuits. १८

शाकं मांसं मृणालानि तुम्बुरुः शक्तवस्तिलाः रसाः फलानि पिण्याकं प्रतिग्राह्या हि सर्वतः १९
Vegetables, meat, lotus stalks, tumburu, roasted grain flour, sesame, juices, fruits, and oil-cake may be accepted from anyone. १९

आपत्काले तु विप्रेण भुक्तं शूद्रगृहे यदि मनस्तापेन शुध्येत द्रपदां वा शतं जपेत् २०
If a Brāhmaṇa, during a time of distress, eats in a Śūdra's house, he becomes purified through sincere remorse, or he should recite the Drupadā verses one hundred times. २०

द्रव्यपाणिश्च शूद्रेण स्पृष्टोच्छिष्टेन कर्हिचित् तद्विजेन न भोक्तव्यमापस्तम्बोऽब्रवीन्मुनिः २१
If food or other provisions have been touched by a Śūdra with remnants of food upon him, a twice-born person should never eat them; so declared the sage Āpastamba. २१

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रेऽष्टमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.




--- Page 13 ---

अथ नवमोऽध्यायः
अपेयपानेऽभक्ष्यभक्षणे च प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम् 
Description of the prescribed methods for remorse for consuming unconsumable drinks and food 

भुञ्जानस्य तु विप्रस्य कदाचित्स्रवते गुदम् उच्छिष्टस्याशुचेस्तस्य प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् १
If, while a Brāhmaṇa is eating, his anus happens to discharge, and he thereby becomes defiled by his own leftover food, what is the prescribed expiation? १

पूर्वं शौचन्तु निर्वर्त्य ततः पश्चादुपस्पृशेत् अहोरात्रोषितोभूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति २
Having first performed the proper cleansing, he should then perform ācamana. After fasting for a day and a night, he becomes purified by consuming pañcagavya. २

अशित्वा सर्वमेवान्नमकृत्वा शौचमात्मनः मोहाद्दुक्त्वा त्रिरात्रन्तु यवान् पीत्वा विशुध्यति ३
Having eaten all the food without performing the prescribed purification, if he does so through delusion, he becomes purified by drinking a preparation of barley for three nights. ३

प्रसृतं यवशस्येन पलमेकन्तु सर्पिषा पलानि पञ्च गोमूत्रं नातिरिक्तवदाशयेत् ४
He should take one prasṛta of barley, one pala of ghee, and five palas of cow urine, without taking anything in excess. ४

अलेह्यानामपेयानामभक्ष्याणाञ्च भक्षणे रेतोमूत्रपुरीषाणां प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् ५
If one consumes things that should not be licked, drunk, or eaten, what is the prescribed expiation for the consumption of semen, urine, or feces? ५

पद्मोदुम्बरबिल्वाश्च कुशाश्वत्थपलाशकाः एतेषामुदकं पीत्वा षड्रात्रेण विशुध्यति ६
Having drunk water prepared from lotus, udumbara, bilva, kuśa, aśvattha, and palāśa, he becomes purified after six nights. ६

ये प्रत्यवसिता विप्राः प्रब्रज्याग्निजलादिषु अनाशकनिवृत्ताश्च गृहस्थत्वं चिकीर्षतः ७
Those Brāhmaṇas who have returned from renunciation, from fire, water, or other such states, and those who have abandoned the practice of fasting unto death and desire to return to household life, ७

चरेयुस्त्रीणि कृच्छ्राणि त्रीणि चान्द्रायणानि वा जातकर्मादिभिः सर्वैः पुनः संस्कारभागिनः तेषां सान्तपनं कृच्छ्रं चान्द्रायणमथापिवा ८
should undertake three Kṛcchras and three Cāndrāyaṇas, or else undergo all the rites of purification beginning with Jātakarma. For them, the Sāntapana Kṛcchra, the Cāndrāyaṇa, or either of these is prescribed. ८

यद्वेष्टितं कालवलाकचिल्लैरमेध्यलिप्तञ्च भवेच्छरीरम् श्रोत्रे मुखे च प्रविशेच्च सम्यक्स्त्रानेन लेपोपहतस्य शुद्धिः ९
If the body becomes soiled by objects such as crows, herons, or kites, or becomes smeared with impure substances, and these enter the ears or mouth, purification is achieved by a proper bath and cleansing of the affected parts. ९

ऊर्ध्वं नाभेः करौ मुक्त्वा यदङ्गमुपहन्यते ऊर्ध्वं स्त्रानमधः शौचं मार्जनेनैव शुध्यति १०
If any part of the body above the navel, excluding the hands, is defiled, it should be cleansed by bathing; for parts below it, purification is by washing. १०

उपानहावमेध्यं वा यस्य संस्पृशते मुखम् मृत्तिकाशोधनं स्त्रानं पञ्चगव्यं विशोधनम् ११
If the mouth comes into contact with an impure object or with footwear, purification consists of cleansing with earth, bathing, and consuming pañcagavya. ११

दशाहाच्छुध्यते विप्रो जन्महानौ स्वयोनिषु षड्भिस्त्रिभिरथैकेन क्षत्रविट्शूद्रयोनिषु १२
A Brāhmaṇa becomes purified after ten days in the event of death within his own birth-group; in the Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, and Śūdra groups, purification is prescribed after six, three, and one day respectively. १२

उपनीतं यदा त्वन्नं भोक्ता च समुपस्थितः अपीतवत्समुत्सृष्टं न दद्यान्नैव होमयेत् १३
When food has been brought and the person who is to eat it is present, if it is abandoned before being consumed, it should neither be given away nor offered into the fire. १३

अन्ने भोजनसम्पन्ने मक्षिकाकेशदूषिते अनन्तरं स्पृशेदापस्तच्चान्नं भस्मना स्पृशेत् १४
If food, after the meal has been completed, is defiled by a fly or by hair, one should immediately touch water and then touch that food with ashes. १४


--- Page 14 ---

शुष्कमांसमयं चान्नं शूद्रान्नं वाप्यकामतः भुक्त्वा कृच्छ्रं चरेद्विप्रो ज्ञानात्कृच्छ्रत्रयं चरेत् १५
If a Brāhmaṇa unknowingly eats food made with dried meat or food belonging to a Śūdra, he should perform a Kṛcchra; if he eats it knowingly, he should perform three Kṛcchras. १५

अभुक्ते मुञ्चते यश्च भुञ्जन् यश्चापि सुच्यते भोक्ता च भोजकश्चैव पङ्कया गच्छति दुष्कृतम् १६
He who abandons food before eating it, and he who, while eating, becomes defiled, both the eater and the one who serves the food incur the sin associated with such impurity. १६

यच्च भुङ्क्ते तु भुक्तं वा दुष्टं वाऽपि विशेषतः अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति १७
Whatever one eats, whether already eaten or especially defiled, is purified by fasting for a day and a night and consuming pañcagavya. १७

उदके चोदकस्थस्तु स्थलस्थश्च स्थले शुचिः पादौ स्थाप्योभयत्रैव आचम्योभयतः शुचिः १८
While standing in water, one is purified in the water; while standing on land, one is purified on land. The feet should be placed in both places, and after performing ācamana in either place, one becomes purified. १८

उत्तीर्य्याचम्य उदकादवतीर्य्य उपस्पृशेत् एवन्तु श्रेयसा युक्तो वरुणेनाभिपूज्यते १९
After coming out of the water, he should perform ācamana; having entered the water again, he should perform the prescribed purification. Thus, being endowed with auspicious conduct, he is honored by Varuṇa. १९

अग्न्यगारे गवां गोष्ठे ब्राह्मणानाञ्च सन्निधौ स्वाध्याये भोजने चैव पादुकानां विसर्जनम् २०
Footwear should be removed in the fire-house, in the cowshed, in the presence of Brāhmaṇas, during Vedic study, and while eating. २०

जम्मप्रभृतिसंस्कारे श्मशानान्ते च भोजनम् असपिण्डैर्न कर्तव्यं चूडाकार्ये विशेषतः २१
At rites beginning with the birth ceremonies, at the cremation ground, and especially during the Cūḍākaraṇa ceremony, food should not be taken with persons who are not Sapindas. २१

याजकान्नं नवश्राद्धं सग्रहे चैव भोजनम् स्त्रीणां प्रथमगर्भे च भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् २२
After eating the food of a sacrificer, the food of a Navaśrāddha, food prepared during a planetary conjunction, or food served at the first pregnancy ceremony of a woman, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. २२

ब्रह्मौदने च श्राद्धे च सीमन्तोन्नयने तथा अन्नश्राद्धे मृतश्राद्धे भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् २३
After eating at a Brahmaudana ceremony, at a Śrāddha, at the Sīmantonnayana ceremony, at an Annaśrāddha, or at a funeral Śrāddha, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. २३

अप्रजा या तु नारी स्यान्नाश्नीयादेव तद्गहे अथ भुञ्जीत मोहाद्यः पूयसं नरकं व्रजेत् २४
One should not eat in the house of a woman who is without offspring. If someone nevertheless eats there through delusion, he goes to the hell called Pūyasa. २४

अल्पेनापि हि शुल्केन पिता कन्यां ददाति यः रौरवे बहुवर्षाणि पुरीषं मूत्रमश्नुते २५
A father who gives his daughter in marriage even for a small bride-price consumes feces and urine in the Raurava hell for many years. २५

स्त्रीधनानि च ये मोहादुपजीवन्ति बान्धवाः स्वर्णं यानानि वस्त्राणि ते पापा यान्त्यधोगतिम् २६
Those relatives who, through delusion, live upon a woman's property—her gold, vehicles, clothing, and other possessions—being sinful, descend to a lower state. २६

राजान्नं तेजआदत्ते शूद्रान्नं ब्रह्मवर्चसम् असंस्कृतन्तु योभुङ्गे स भुङ्गे पृथिवीमलम् २७
Food belonging to a king takes away one's radiance, while food belonging to a Śūdra takes away one's spiritual splendor; he who eats food that has not been properly consecrated or sanctified is said to eat the impurity of the earth. २७


--- Page 15 ---

मृतके सूतके चैव गृहीते शशिभास्करे हस्तिच्छायान्तु यो भुङ्गे पापः स पुरुषो भवेत् २८
During a period of impurity caused by a death or birth, or during an eclipse of the Moon or Sun, whoever eats in the shadow of an elephant becomes a sinful person. २८

पुनर्भूः पुनरेता च रेतोधा कामचारिणी आसां प्रथमगर्भेषु भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् २९
After eating during the first pregnancy of a woman who is a remarried woman, a woman who has returned to her husband, a woman who bears children by another man, or a woman who acts according to her own desire, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. २९

मातृघ्नश्च पितृघ्नश्च ब्रह्मघ्नो गुरुतल्पगः विशेषाद्भुक्तमेतेषां भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ३०
After eating food belonging especially to one who has killed his mother, killed his father, killed a Brāhmaṇa, or violated the bed of his teacher, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ३०

रजकव्याधशैलूषवेणुचर्मोपजीविनाम् भुक्त्वैषां ब्राह्मणश्चान्नं शुद्धिं चान्द्रायणेन तु ३१
If a Brāhmaṇa eats the food of washermen, hunters, actors, bamboo-workers, or those who live by working with leather, he becomes purified by performing the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ३१

उच्छ्रिष्टोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः कदाचिदुपजायते सवर्णेन तदोत्थाय उपस्पृश्य शुचिर्भवेत्
If one becomes contaminated by contact with the leftover food of a person of the same varṇa, he should rise and perform ācamana; thereby he becomes purified.

उच्छिष्टोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः शुना शूद्रेण वा द्विजः उपोष्य रजनीमेकां पञ्चगव्येन शुद्धयति ३२
If a twice-born person becomes contaminated by contact with the leftover food of a dog or a Śūdra, he becomes purified by fasting for one night and consuming pañcagavya. ३२

ब्राह्मणस्य सदाकालं शूद्रे प्रेषणकारिणः भूमावन्नं प्रदातव्यं यथैव श्वा तथैव सः ३३
A Śūdra who is constantly employed in carrying out errands for a Brāhmaṇa should be given food on the ground; he is to be treated in the same manner as a dog. ३३

अनूदकेष्वरप्येषु चौरव्याघ्राकुले पथि कृत्वा मूत्रं पुरीषञ्च द्रव्यहस्तः कथं शुचिः ३४
On a road without water or in a place infested with thieves and tigers, if one has to urinate or defecate while carrying valuables in one's hand, how can one become purified?

भूमावन्नं प्रतिष्ठाप्य कृत्वा शौचं यथार्थतः उत्सङ्गे गृह्य पक्वान्नमुपस्पृश्य ततः शुचिः ३५
Having placed the food on the ground and performed the proper cleansing, one should take the cooked food into one's lap, perform ācamana, and then become purified. ३५

मूत्रोच्चारं द्विजः कृत्वा अकृत्वा शौचमात्मनः मोहाङ्गुक्त्वा त्रिरात्रन्तु गव्यं पीत्वा विशुध्यति ३६
If a twice-born person urinates or defecates without performing his own prescribed cleansing, and does so through delusion, he becomes purified by drinking products of the cow for three nights. ३६

उदक्यां यदि गच्छेत्तु ब्राह्मणो मदमोहितः चान्द्रायणेन शुध्येतब्राह्मणानांच भोजनैः ३७
If a Brāhmaṇa, overcome by intoxication or delusion, approaches a menstruating woman, he becomes purified by performing the Cāndrāyaṇa penance and by feeding Brāhmaṇas. ३७

भुक्तोच्छिष्टस्त्वनाचान्तश्चाण्डालैः श्वपचेन वा प्रमादाद्यदि संस्पृष्टो ब्राह्मणो ज्ञानदुर्बलः ३८
If a Brāhmaṇa, deficient in awareness, having eaten and without performing ācamana, is accidentally touched by a Caṇḍāla or a Śvapaca, ३८

स्नात्वा त्रिषवणं नित्यं ब्रह्मचारी धराशयः स त्रिरात्रोषितो भूत्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ३९
he should bathe three times daily, live as a celibate sleeping on the ground, and, after fasting for three nights, become purified by consuming pañcagavya. ३९

--- Page 16 ---

चाण्डालेन तु संस्पृष्टो यश्चापः पिबति द्विजः अहोरात्रोषितो भूत्वा त्रिषवणेन शुध्यति ४०
If a twice-born person, having been touched by a Caṇḍāla, drinks water, he becomes purified by fasting for a day and a night and bathing three times a day. ४०

सायं प्रातस्त्वहोरात्रं पादं कृच्छ्रस्य तं विदुः सायं प्रातस्तथैवैकं दिनद्वयमयाचितम् ४१
The expiation performed by taking food in the evening and morning for one day and night is known as a quarter of the Kṛcchra; similarly, taking food in the evening and morning for two days without asking for it is prescribed. ४१

दिनद्वयञ्च नाश्नीयात्कृच्छ्रार्द्ध तद्विधीयते प्रायश्चित्तं लघु ह्येतत्पापेषु तु यथाऽहतः ४२
If one eats nothing for two days, half of the Kṛcchra is prescribed. This is a light form of expiation, appropriate according to the nature of the sin. ४२

कृष्णाजिनतिलग्राही हस्त्यश्वानाञ्च विक्रयी प्रेतनिर्यातकश्चैव न भूयः पुरुषोभवेत् ४३
One who takes away a black-antelope skin or sesame, one who sells elephants or horses, and one who carries away corpses does not become a person again. ४३

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे नवमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the ninth chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra.


अथ दशमोऽध्यायः
Now, the tenth chapter:

अथ मोक्षाधिकारिणामभिधानवर्णनम् 
The description of those qualified for liberation.

आचान्तोऽप्यशुचिस्तावद्यावन्नोद्भियते जलम् उद्धतेऽप्यशुचिस्तावद्यावद्भूमिर्न लिप्यते १
Even after performing ācamana, a person remains impure so long as the water has not been raised; even after raising it, he remains impure so long as the earth has not been smeared. १

भूमावपि च लिप्तायां तावत्स्यादशुचिः पुमान् आसनादुत्थितस्तस्माद्यावन्नाऽऽक्रमते महीम् २
Even when the earth has been smeared, a person remains impure after rising from his seat until he steps upon the ground. २

न यमं यममित्याहुरात्मा वै यम उच्यते आत्मा संयमितो येन तं यमः किं करिष्यति ३
Yama is not merely called Yama because of external restraint; the Self itself is called Yama. What can Yama do to one who has restrained his own Self? ३

न तथाऽसिस्तथा तीक्ष्णः सर्पो वा दुरधिष्ठितः यथा क्रोधो हि जन्तूनां शरीरस्थो विनाशकः ४
Neither a sword, however sharp, nor a serpent that is difficult to control is as destructive to living beings as anger residing within the body. ४

क्षमा गुणो हि जन्तूनामिहामूत्रसुखप्रदः अरिर्वानित्यसंक्रुद्धो यथाऽऽत्मादुरधिष्ठितः
Forgiveness is indeed a virtue of living beings, bringing happiness both here and hereafter. An ever-angry person is like an enemy, as difficult to control as the self itself.

एकःक्षमावतां दोषो द्वितीयो नोपपद्यते यदेनं क्षमया युक्तमशक्तं मन्यते जनः ५
The forgiving are said to have only one fault, and no second; people may regard a person endowed with forgiveness as weak. ५

न शक्तिशास्त्राभिरतस्य मोक्षो नचैव रम्यावसथप्रियस्य न भोजनाच्छादनतत्परस्य एकान्तशीलस्य दृढव्रतस्य ६
There is no liberation for one devoted to the display of power and weapons, nor for one fond of luxurious dwellings, nor for one absorbed in food and clothing; liberation belongs to one who lives in solitude and observes firm vows. ६


--- Page 17 ---

मोक्षो भवेत् प्रीतिनिवर्त्तकस्य अध्यात्मयोगैकरतस्य सम्यक् मोक्षो भवेन्नित्यमहिंसकस्य स्वाध्याययोगागतमानसस्य ७
Liberation is attained by one who has turned away from worldly attachments and is wholly devoted to the yoga of the Self; true liberation is attained by one who is always non-violent and whose mind is absorbed in the practice of self-study. ७

क्रोधयुक्तो यद्यजते यजुहोति यदचति सर्वं हरति दत्तस्य आमकुम्भ इवोदकम् ८
Whatever a person performs in anger—whatever sacrifice he conducts, whatever he offers into the fire, and whatever he gives—anger takes away the fruit of it all, just as an unbaked clay vessel loses its water. ८

अपमानात्तपोवृद्धिः सम्मानात्तपसः क्षयः अर्चितः पूजतो विप्रो दुग्धा गौरिव सीदति ९
Through insult, austerity increases; through honor, austerity diminishes. A Brāhmaṇa who is excessively honored and worshipped becomes weakened, like a cow that has been milked. ९

आप्यायते यथा धेनुस्तृणैरमृतसम्भवैः एवं जपश्च होमैश्च पुनराप्यायते द्विजः १०
Just as a cow is nourished by grass, which is like nectar, so a twice-born person is renewed and strengthened through japa and fire offerings. १०

मातृवत् परदारांश्च परद्रव्याणि लोष्ट्रवत् आत्मवत् सवभूतानि यः पश्यति स पश्यति ११
He truly sees who regards other men's wives as his mother, others' wealth as a clod of earth, and all living beings as himself. ११

रजकव्याधशैलूषवेणुचर्मोपजीविनाम् यो भुङ्गे भुक्तमेतेषां प्राजापत्यं विशोधनम् १२
Whoever eats the food of washermen, hunters, actors, bamboo-workers, or those who live by working with leather should undergo the Prājāpatya penance for purification. १२

अगम्यागमनं कृत्वा अभक्ष्यस्य च भक्षणम् शुद्धिं चान्द्रायणं कृत्वा अथर्वोक्तं तथैव च १३
After approaching a woman who should not be approached and eating food that should not be eaten, one should undergo the Cāndrāyaṇa penance for purification, as prescribed in the Atharva tradition. १३

अग्निहोत्रं त्यजेद्यस्तु स नरोवीरहा भवेत् तस्य शुद्धिर्विधातव्या नान्या चान्द्रायणादृते १४
The man who abandons the Agnihotra becomes as one who has slain a hero. For him, purification must be prescribed, and there is no other means of purification apart from the Cāndrāyaṇa. १४

विवाहोत्सवयज्ञेषु अन्तरा मृतसूतके सद्यः शुद्धिं विजानीयात्पूर्वं सङ्कल्पितं चरेत् १५
If death or birth impurity occurs in the midst of a wedding celebration or sacrifice, one should understand that immediate purification is possible and should complete what had previously been undertaken. १५

देवद्रोण्यां विवाहेषु यज्ञेषु प्रतरेषु च कल्पितं सिद्धमन्नाद्यं नाशौचं मृतसूतके १६
Food and other offerings that have already been prepared in the devadroṇī, at weddings, sacrifices, and religious crossings or ceremonies are not rendered impure by the occurrence of death or birth impurity. १६

इत्यापस्तम्बीये धर्मशास्त्रे दशमोऽध्यायः समाप्ताचेयमापस्तम्बस्मृतिः
Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Āpastambīya Dharmaśāstra. This Āpastamba Smṛti is hereby concluded.

