--- Page 1 ---
अथ अत्रिस्मृतिः
The Atri Smṛti.

श्रीगणेशाय नमः
Salutations to Śrī Gaṇeśa.

अज्ञानतिमिरान्धस्य वृतेनानेन केशव प्रसीद सुमुखो नाथ ज्ञानदृष्टिप्रदो भव १
O Keśava, I am blinded by the darkness of ignorance and enveloped by it. Be gracious, O benevolent Lord, and grant me the vision of knowledge. १

हुताग्निहोत्रमासीनमत्रिं श्रुतवतां वरम् उपगम्य च पृच्छन्ति ऋषयः शंसितव्रताः २
The sages of well-observed vows approached Atri, the foremost among those learned in sacred knowledge, who was seated performing the Agnihotra, and asked him. २

भगवन् केन दानेन जपेन नियमेन च शुध्यन्ते पातकैर्युक्तास्तं ब्रवीषि महामुने ३
O Bhagavān, O great sage, by what gifts, recitations, and observances do those afflicted by sins become purified? Please tell us. ३

अपख्यापितदोषाणां पापानां महतां तथा सर्वेषां चोपपातानां शुद्धिं वक्ष्यामि तत्वतः ४
I shall explain, in truth, the purification from great sins whose faults have been declared, as well as from all minor sins. ४

प्राणायामैः पवित्रैश्च दानैर्होमैर्जपैस्तथा शुद्धिकामाः प्रमुच्यन्ते पावकेभ्यो न संशयः ५
Those who desire purification are freed from sins through sacred Prāṇāyāmas, gifts, fire offerings, and recitations; of this there is no doubt. ५

प्राणायामान् पवित्रांश्च व्याहृतीः प्रणवन्तथा पवित्रपाणिरासीनोऽध्यभ्यस्यब्रह्म नैत्यिकम् ६
With purified hands, while seated, one should practice the sacred Prāṇāyāmas, the Vyāhṛtis, and the Praṇava, and continually practice the daily recitation of Brahman. ६

आवर्त्तयेत्सदायुक्तः प्राणायामान् पुनः पुनः आकेशाग्रादानखान्तात्तपस्तप्यत जुत्तमम् ७
Being ever devoted, one should repeat the Prāṇāyāmas again and again; from the tips of the hair to the ends of the nails, the highest form of austerity is thereby performed. ७

त्वक्चर्ममांसरुधिरमेदोमज्जास्थिभिः कृताः तथेन्द्रियकृता दोषाः दह्यन्ते प्राणनिग्रहात्
निरोधाज्जायते वायुर्वायोरग्निर्हि जायते तापेनापो हि जायन्ते ततोऽन्तः शुध्यते त्रिभिः ८
The impurities arising from the skin, flesh, blood, fat, marrow, and bones, as well as those produced by the senses, are burned away through the restraint of the vital breath. Through restraint, air arises; from air, fire arises; through its heat, water arises; and by these three, one is purified inwardly. ८

तथा चर्म तथानङ्गा दोषा अभ्यर्ति धर्मतः तथेन्द्रियकृता दोषा दह्यन्ते प्राणनिग्रहात् ९
Likewise, the impurities associated with the skin and the body are destroyed through the practice of dharma; the impurities produced by the senses are likewise burned away through restraint of the vital breath. ९

प्राणायामैर्दहेत् दोषाद्धारणाभिश्च किल्विषम् प्रत्याहारेण विषयान्ध्यानेनानैश्वरान् गुणान् १०
Through Prāṇāyāma one should burn away impurities; through concentration, sins; through withdrawal of the senses, attachment to sense objects; and through meditation, the qualities that obstruct spiritual mastery. १०

न च तीव्रेण तपसा न स्वाध्यायैर्नचेज्यया मतिंगन्तुं सुराः शक्ता योगात्संप्राप्नुवन्तियाम् ११
The gods are unable to attain through severe austerity, self-study, or sacrifice that state which is attained through Yoga. ११

योगात्सम्प्राप्यते ज्ञानं योगाद्धर्मस्य लक्षणम् योगः परं तपो नित्यं तस्माद्युक्तः सदा भवेत् १२
Knowledge is attained through Yoga; through Yoga, the characteristics of dharma are realized. Yoga is the supreme and eternal austerity; therefore, one should always remain devoted to it. १२

प्रणवाद्यास्तथा वेदाः प्रणवे पर्यवस्थिताः वाङ्गयः प्रणवं सर्वं तस्मात्प्रणवमभ्यसेत् १३
The Vedas beginning with the Praṇava are established in the Praṇava; all sacred speech is contained in the Praṇava. Therefore, one should practice the Praṇava. १३

प्रणवे विनियुक्तस्य व्याहृतीषु च सप्तसु त्रिपदायां च गायत्र्यां न भयं विद्यते क्वचित् १४
For one who is devoted to the Praṇava, the seven Vyāhṛtis, and the three-footed Gāyatrī, there is no fear anywhere. १४

एकाक्षरं परं ब्रह्म प्राणायामः परं तपः ब्रह्माणी चैव गायत्री पावनं परमं स्मृतम् १५
The single syllable is the Supreme Brahman; Prāṇāyāma is the supreme austerity; the Gāyatrī, the sacred utterance of Brahman, is remembered as the supreme purifier. १५

समाहृतीकां सप्रणवां गायत्रीं शिरसा सह त्रिः पठेदायतः प्राणः प्राणायामः स उच्यते १६
One should recite the Gāyatrī together with the Vyāhṛtis and the Praṇava, along with the Śiras, three times, with the breath extended; this is called Prāṇāyāma. १६

इत्यात्रेयस्मृत्यां प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the First Chapter of the Ātreya Smṛti.


--- Page 2 ---

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Now, the Second Chapter.

प्राणायामांस्तथा कुर्याद्यथाविधिरतन्द्रितः अहोरात्रिकृतात्पापात्तत्क्षणादेव शुध्यति १
One should perform Prāṇāyāma according to the prescribed rule, without negligence; one is purified at once from sins committed throughout the day and night. १

कर्म्मणा मनसा वाचा यदेनः कुरुते निशि अतिष्ठत्पूर्वसन्ध्यायां प्राणायामैस्तु शुध्यति २
Whatever sin one commits at night through action, thought, or speech, one should perform Prāṇāyāma at the preceding dawn; thereby one becomes purified. २

प्राणायामैर्य आत्मानं संयम्यास्ते पुनः पुनः दशद्वादशभिर्वापि चतुर्विंशात्परं तपः ३
One who repeatedly restrains the self through Prāṇāyāma, whether by ten, twelve, or twenty-four repetitions, performs an austerity superior to these. ३

कौत्सं जप्त्वाप इत्येतद्वासिष्ठं च तृचं प्रति कुष्माण्डं पावमानं च सुरापोऽपि विशुद्धति ४
By reciting the Kauṭsa hymn beginning with “Āpaḥ,” the Vāsiṣṭha Trīca, the Kūṣmāṇḍa, and the Pāvamāna hymns, even one who has drunk liquor becomes purified. ४

सकृज्जप्त्वास्य पानीयं शिवसङ्कल्पमेव च सुवर्णमपहृत्यापि क्षणाद्भवति निर्मलः ५
Having recited this once and drunk water, together with the Śiva-saṅkalpa hymn, even one who has stolen gold becomes pure in an instant. ५

हविष्मांस्तु यमभ्यस्य न तमंह इतीव च सूक्तं तु पौरुषं जप्त्वा मुच्यते गुरुतल्पगः ६
By practicing the Havismat and the hymn beginning with “Na tamaṃha,” and by reciting the Pauruṣa Sūkta, one who has violated the bed of his guru is freed from that sin. ६

सव्याहृतीकाः सप्रणवाः प्राणायामास्तु षोडश अपि भ्रूणहनं मासात्पुनन्त्यहरहः कृताः ७
Sixteen Prāṇāyāmas, performed with the Vyāhṛtis and the Praṇava, purify even one who has killed a fetus, when practiced every day for a month. ७

अपि वाप्सु निमज्जन्वा त्रिः पठेदघमर्षणम् यथाश्वमेधः क्रतुराट् तादृशं मनुरब्रवीत् ८
Even while immersed in water, one should recite the Aghamarṣaṇa three times; Manu has declared that its merit is like that of the king of sacrifices, the Aśvamedha. ८

आरम्भयज्ञः क्षत्रस्य हविर्यज्ञो विशामपि परिचर्ययज्ञः शूद्रस्तु जपयज्ञो द्विजोत्तमः ९
The performance of undertakings is the sacrifice prescribed for a Kṣatriya; the Haviryajña is for Vaiśyas; service is the sacrifice for a Śūdra, while recitation is the sacrifice for the excellent twice-born. ९

आरम्भयज्ञाज्जपयज्ञो विशिष्टो दशभिर्गुणैः उपांशु स्याच्छतगुणः सहस्रो मानसः स्मृतः १०
The Japa-yajña is superior to the Ārambha-yajña tenfold; whispered recitation is said to be a hundred times greater, and mental recitation a thousand times greater. १०

उपांशुस्तुचलज्जिह्वाद्धददशनच्छद ईरितः अधरोष्ठविभागो वा विश्वासोपांशुलक्षणः निर्विकारेण वक्रेण मनसा मानसः स्मृतः ११
Upāṃśu recitation is that in which the tongue moves slightly and the words are uttered without being clearly heard, or in which there is movement of the lower lip; this is the characteristic of whispered recitation. Mental recitation is performed with an unmoving mouth and an undisturbed mind. ११

सहस्रपरमां देवीं शतमध्यां दशावराम् गायत्रीं यः पठेद्विप्रो न स पापेन लिप्यते १२
The Brāhmaṇa who recites the divine Gāyatrī a thousand times at most, a hundred times ordinarily, or at least ten times, is not tainted by sin. १२

क्षत्रियो बाहुवीर्येण तरेदापदमात्मनः वित्तेन वैश्यशूद्रौ तो जपहोमैर्द्विजोत्तमः १३
A Kṣatriya should overcome his difficulties through the strength of his arms; a Vaiśya and a Śūdra through wealth; and the excellent twice-born through Japa and Homa. १३

यथाश्वा रथहीनास्तु रथो वाश्वर्यथा विना एवं तपोऽप्यविद्यस्य विद्या वाप्यतपस्विनः १४
Just as horses are useless without a chariot, and a chariot without horses, so too austerity without knowledge and knowledge without austerity are incomplete. १४

यथान्नं मधुसंयुक्तं मधु वान्येन संयुतम् एवं तपश्च विद्या च संयुक्तं भेषजं महत् १५
Just as food combined with honey, or honey combined with another substance, becomes beneficial, so austerity and knowledge, when joined together, constitute a great remedy. १५

विद्यातपोभ्यां संयुक्तं ब्राह्मणं जपतत्परम् कुत्सितैरपि वर्त्तन्तमेनो न प्रतिपद्यते १६
A Brāhmaṇa devoted to Japa and endowed with both knowledge and austerity, even if he engages in improper conduct, does not incur sin. १६

इति आत्रेयस्मृतौ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Ātreya Smṛti.

--- Page 3 ---

यस्य कार्यशतं साग्रं कृतं वेदश्च साध्यते सर्वं तत्तस्य वेदाग्निर्दहत्यग्निरिवेन्धनम् १
For one who has accomplished hundreds of meritorious acts and mastered the Veda, the fire of the Veda burns all his sins, just as fire burns fuel. १

यथा जातबलो वाग्निर्दहत्यार्द्रानपि द्रुमान् तथा दहन्ति वेदज्ञाः कर्मजन्दोषमात्मनः २
Just as a fire that has gained strength burns even moist trees, so those who know the Veda burn away the defects arising from their own actions. २

यथा महाह्रदे लोष्टं क्षिप्तं सर्वं विनश्यति एवमात्मकृतं पापं त्रयी दहति देहिनः ३
Just as a clod of earth thrown into a great lake completely dissolves, so the threefold Veda burns away the sins committed by a person himself. ३

न वेदबलमाश्रित्य पापकर्मरतिर्भवेत् अज्ञानाच्च प्रमादाच्च दह्यते कर्म नेतरत् ४
One should not indulge in sinful actions relying upon the power of the Veda; only actions performed through ignorance or negligence are burned away, and not those deliberately committed otherwise. ४

तपस्तपति योऽरण्ये मुनिर्मूलफलाशनः ऋचमेकाञ्च योऽधीते तच्च तानि च तत्फलम् ५
A sage who performs austerities in the forest, living on roots and fruits, and one who studies even a single Ṛk verse, obtain the merit of those austerities and studies. ५

वेदाभ्यासो यथाशक्त्या महायज्ञक्रियाक्षमाः नाशयन्त्याशु पापानि महापातकजान्यपि ६
Study of the Veda according to one's ability, together with the performance of the great sacrifices, quickly destroys sins, even those arising from the great transgressions. ६

इतिहासपुराणाभ्यां वेदं समुपवृंहयेत् विभेत्यल्पश्रुताद्वेदान्मामयं प्रतरिष्यति ७
One should supplement and strengthen one's understanding of the Veda through the Itihāsas and Purāṇas; fearing that a person of little learning may misinterpret the Veda and cross beyond its true meaning. ७

याजनाध्यापनाद्दानात्तथैवाहुः प्रतिग्रहात् विप्रेषु न भवेद्दोषो ज्वलनार्कसमा हिते ८
It is said that there is no fault in Brāhmaṇas arising from officiating at sacrifices, teaching, giving gifts, or receiving gifts, when their conduct is pure like fire and the sun. ८

शङ्कास्थाने समुत्पन्ने भक्ष्यभोज्यप्रतिग्रहे आहारशुद्धिं वक्ष्यामि तन्मे निगदतः शृणु ९
When doubt arises concerning what may be eaten, what may be consumed, or what may be accepted, I shall explain the rules for purity of food; listen to me as I declare them. ९

सर्ववेदपवित्राणि वक्ष्याम्यह मतः परम् येषांजपैश्च होमैश्च तिलकल्पश्च संव्रता १०
I shall now explain the most purifying passages of all the Vedas, by whose recitation, Homas, and observances involving sesame one becomes purified. १०

अघमर्षणं वेदवतं शुद्धवत्यः शरत्समाः कुष्माण्डः पावमानश्च दुर्गा सावित्रिरेव च ११
They are the Aghamarṣaṇa, Vedavrata, Śuddhavatī, Śarat-samā, Kūṣmāṇḍa, Pāvamāna, Durgā, and Sāvitrī. ११

शतरुद्रं धर्मशिरं त्रिसुपर्णं महाव्रतम् अनिषङ्गादयस्तोभासामानि व्याहृतिस्तथा १२
The Śatarudra, Dharmaśira, Trisuparṇa, Mahāvrata, the Sāmans beginning with Aniṣaṅga and others, and the Vyāhṛtis are also [among the purifying recitations]. १२



--- Page 4 ---

गारुडानि च सामानि गायत्रीं रैवतं तथा पुरुषव्रतञ्च भावञ्च तथा वेदकृतानि च १३
The Gāruḍa Sāmans, the Gāyatrī, the Raivata, the Puruṣavrata, the Bhāva, and the Veda-created hymns are also [among the purifying recitations]. १३

अव्लिङ्गा बार्हस्पत्यं च वाक्सूक्तञ्चामृतं तथा गोसूक्तञ्चाश्वसूक्तञ्च इन्द्रशुद्धेश्च सामनि १४
The Avliṅga, the Bārhaspatya, the Vāk Sūkta, the Amṛta, the Go Sūkta, the Aśva Sūkta, and the Sāmans for the purification of Indra are also [to be recited]. १४

त्रीण्याज्यदोहानि रथन्तरञ्च अग्नेर्वृतं वामदेव्यं बृहच्च एतानिजप्यानिपुनातिपापाज्जातिस्मरत्वंलभते यदिच्छेत् १५
The three Ājyadohas, the Rathantara, Agnervṛta, Vāmadevya, and Bṛhat—these are to be recited; they purify one from sin, and one may attain the remembrance of former births and obtain whatever one desires. १५

अग्नेरपत्यं प्रथमं हिरण्यं भूर्वैष्णवी सूर्यसुताश्च गावः लोकास्रयस्ते न भवन्ति दत्ताः यः काञ्चनङ्गाञ्च महीञ्च दद्यात् १६
Gold is said to be the first offspring of Agni; the Earth is Vaiṣṇavī, and cows are the daughters of the Sun. The three worlds are not [beyond the merit of] one who gives gold, a cow, and land. १६

सर्वेषामेव दानानामेकजन्मानुगं फलम् हाटकक्षितिधेनूनां सप्तजन्मानुगं फलम् १७
The merit of all other gifts extends for one birth, whereas the merit of gifts of gold, land, and cows extends for seven births. १७

सर्वकामफला वृक्षा नद्यः पायसकर्दमाः काञ्चना यत्र प्रासादास्तत्र गच्छन्ति गोप्रदाः १८
For those who give cows, trees granting all desires, rivers flowing with milk, and golden temples are said to be attained. १८

वैशाख्यां पौर्णमास्यान्तु ब्राह्मणान् सप्त पञ्च वा तिलक्षौद्रेण संयुक्तांस्तर्पयित्वा यथाविधि १९
On the full-moon day of Vaiśākha, having properly satisfied seven or five Brāhmaṇas with sesame mixed with honey, १९

प्रीयतां धर्मराजेति यद्वा मनसि वर्त्तते यावज्जीवकृतं पापं तत्क्षणादेव नश्यति २०
saying, “May Dharmarāja be pleased,” or whatever appropriate thought arises in the mind, all the sins committed throughout one's life perish at that very moment. २०

सुवर्णनाभं यो दद्यात्सुमुखं कृतमार्गकम् तिलैर्दद्यात्तस्य पुष्पफलं पुण्यं च यत् शृणु २१
Hear the merit of one who gives a golden Nābha, with a beautiful face and a properly prepared path, and who gives sesame: [the following is] its flower, fruit, and merit. २१

सा सुवर्णधरा धेनुः सशैलवनकानना या तु सागरपर्यन्ता भवेद्दता न संशयः २२
It is as though he has given a golden cow, together with mountains, forests, and groves, extending to the ocean; of this there is no doubt. २२

तिलान् कृष्णाजिने कृत्वा सुवर्णमधुसर्पिषा ददाति यस्तु विप्राय सर्वं तरति दुष्कृतम् २३
Whoever places sesame upon a black antelope skin and gives it to a Brāhmaṇa together with gold, honey, and ghee, crosses beyond all wrongdoing. २३

इति आत्रेयस्मृतौ तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Ātreya Smṛti.



--- Page 5 ---


अथ रहस्य प्रायश्चित्तानि व्याख्यास्यामः
Now we shall explain the secret forms of expiation.

सामान्यस्त्रीगमनरहस्ये रहस्य प्रक्राशे प्रकाशं पावनं अनुतिष्ठेत् । वा--समान्यमगम्यागमनन्दुरन्नभोजनान्तौ रहस्यौ रहस्यं प्रकाशं वावनमनुतिष्ठेत् । अथवाप्सुनिमज्यन् समन्दोऽयं त्रिरावृत्य शुद्धेत् । गोवन्यवधे कन्यादषणे इन्द्रशुद्धया इत्यापः पीत्वा मुच्यते । वेदस्यैवगुणं वापि सद्यः शोधनमुच्यते एकादशगुणान्वापि रुद्रानावर्त्य शुध्यति १
In the secret case of intercourse with an ordinary woman, one should perform the prescribed purification privately; when the matter becomes public, the purification should be performed openly. Alternatively, in cases of improper intercourse and eating forbidden food, the prescribed purification may be performed either privately or publicly. Or, immersing oneself in water, one should recite the prescribed passage three times and become purified. In the killing of a cow and in violation of a maiden, one becomes free from the sin by drinking water while reciting “Indraśuddhyā.”
Even the recitation of the prescribed portion of the Veda is said to bring immediate purification; alternatively, by reciting the Rudra eleven times, one becomes purified. १

महापातकोपपातकेभ्यो मलिनीकरणेभ्यो मुच्यते त्रिपदा नाम गायत्री वेदे वाजसनेयके त्रिः कृत्वोऽन्तर्जले प्रोक्ता सर्वपापं व्यपोहति २
One becomes freed from the Mahāpātakas, Upapātakas, and acts causing impurity by reciting the three-footed Gāyatrī. In the Vājasaneya Veda, when recited three times while standing immersed in water, it removes all sins. २

ब्राह्मणी गमने स्त्रात्वोदकुम्भान् ब्राह्मणाय दद्यात् क्षत्रियावैश्यागमने तापसां त्रिरावृत्य शुद्धयति शूद्रागमने अघमर्षणं त्रिरावृत्य शुद्धयति गुरुदान् गत्वा वृषभ द्वादशावृत्या शुद्धयति अपेयं पीत्वा अघमर्षणेनापः पीत्वा विशुद्धयति अशक्तः प्रायश्चित्ते सर्वरात्रमनुशोच्य शुद्धयेत अग्निसोम इन्द्रसोम इति जपित्वा कन्यादूषी विमुच्यते सोमं राजानमिति जपित्वा विषदा अग्निदाश्च विमुच्यन्ते सर्वेषामेव पापानां सङ्करे समुपस्थिते ३
For intercourse with a Brāhmaṇa woman, one should bathe and give water-filled vessels to a Brāhmaṇa. For intercourse with a Kṣatriya or Vaiśya woman, one becomes purified by reciting the Tāpasā three times. For intercourse with a Śūdra woman, one becomes purified by reciting the Aghamarṣaṇa three times. For intercourse with the wife of one's guru, one becomes purified by reciting the Vṛṣabha twelve times. After drinking something forbidden, one becomes purified by drinking water while reciting the Aghamarṣaṇa. One who is unable to perform the prescribed expiation should remain remorseful throughout the night and thereby become purified. By reciting “Agni-Soma, Indra-Soma,” one who has violated a maiden is freed from the sin. By reciting “Somaṃ Rājānam,” one who has consumed poison and one who has caused a fire to be set becomes freed. When a mixture or combination of all these sins occurs, [the prescribed expiations are to be undertaken accordingly]. ३

--- Page 6 ---

 
दशसाहस्रमभ्यस्ता गायत्री शोधनी परा ब्रह्महा गुरुतल्पी वाऽगम्या गामी तथैव च ४
The Gāyatrī, practiced ten thousand times, is the supreme purifier; it purifies even one who has committed Brahminicide, violated the teacher’s bed, or had intercourse with an improper woman. ४

स्वर्णन्तेयी च गोघ्नी च तथा विस्स्रम्भघातकः शरणागतघाती च कूटसाक्षी त्वकार्य्यकृत् ५
It also purifies one who has stolen gold, killed a cow, killed one who trusted him, killed one who had sought refuge, given false testimony, or committed a forbidden act. ५

एवमाद्येषु चान्येषु पापेष्वभिरतश्चिरम् प्राणायामांस्तु यः कुर्यात्सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति ६
Whoever has long been engaged in these and other such sins should perform prāṇāyāmas until sunrise. ६

सूर्यस्योदयनं प्राप्य निर्मला धौतकल्मषाः भवन्ति भास्कराकारा विधूमा इव पावकाः ७
Upon the rising of the Sun, they become purified and cleansed of their sins, radiant like the Sun and like fire without smoke. ७

न हि ध्यानेन सदृशं पवित्रमिह विद्यते श्वपाकेष्वपि भुञ्जानो ध्यानेनैवात्र लिप्यते ८
There is nothing in this world as purifying as meditation; even one who eats among the Śvapākas is not tainted here when established in meditation. ८

ध्यानमेव वरो धर्मो ध्यानमेव परं तपः ध्यानमेव परं शौचं तस्माद्धयानपरो भवेत् ९
Meditation alone is the highest dharma; meditation alone is the supreme austerity; meditation alone is the supreme purity. Therefore, one should be devoted to meditation. ९

सर्वपापप्रसक्तोऽपि ध्यानं नियतमभ्यसेत् सर्वदा ध्यानयुक्तश्च तपस्वी पंक्तिपावनः १०
Even one deeply involved in all kinds of sins should regularly practice meditation. The ascetic who is always devoted to meditation becomes a purifier of the ritual assembly. १०

पुनस्तपस्वी भवति पंक्तिपावनपावनः
Again, the ascetic becomes the purifier of those who purify the ritual assembly.

इति आत्रेयस्मृतौ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the Ātreya Smṛti.



--- Page 7 ---


चतुरस्रं ब्राह्मणस्य तिर्कोणं क्षत्रियस्य तु वर्तुलञ्चैव वैश्यस्य शूद्रस्याभ्युक्षणं स्मृतम् ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च रुद्रश्च श्रीर्हताशन एव च १
The food-mandala of a Brāhmaṇa should be square, that of a Kṣatriya triangular, and that of a Vaiśya circular; for a Śūdra, sprinkling is prescribed. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Śrī, and Hutāśana [Agni] are said to preside over these mandalas. १

मण्डलान्युपजीवन्ति तस्मात्कुर्वन्ति मण्डलम् यातुधानाः पिशाचाश्च क्रूराश्चैव तु राक्षसाः २
Yātudhānas, Piśācas, and cruel Rākṣasas live upon [food lacking] these mandalas; therefore, the mandala should be made. २

हरन्ति रसमन्नस्य मण्डलेन विवर्जितम् गोमयैर्मण्डलं कृत्वा भोक्तव्यमिति निश्चितम् ३
They take away the essence of food that is without a mandala. Therefore, it is prescribed that one should make the mandala with cow dung before eating. ३

यत्र क्वपतितस्यान्नं भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् यतिश्च ब्रह्मचारी च पक्वान्नस्वामिनावुभौ ४
If cooked food falls anywhere and is eaten, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. A Yati and a Brahmacārin are both considered the rightful owners of their own prepared food [and it should not be consumed without their permission]. ४

तयोरन्नमदत्त्वा च भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् यतिहस्ते जलं दद्याद्वैतं दद्यात्पुनर्जलम् ५
Without giving food to them, if one eats [their food], one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. Water should be given into the hand of a Yati; after giving it, water should again be offered. ५

तद्वैक्षं मेरुणा तुल्यं तज्जलं सागरोपमम् वामहस्तेन यो भुङ्गे पयः पिवति वा द्विजः ६
That food is equal to Mount Meru, and that water is comparable to the ocean. A twice-born who eats with his left hand or drinks milk with it [incurs a corresponding fault]. ६

सुरापानेन तत्तुल्यं मनुः स्वायम्भुवोऽब्रवीत् हस्तदत्तास्तु ये स्नेहाल्लवणव्यञ्जनादि च ७
Manu Svāyambhuva has declared that this is equivalent to drinking liquor. Salt, vegetables, and other such foods that are lovingly given by hand [should likewise be treated according to the prescribed rule]. ७

दातारं नोपतिष्ठन्ति भोक्ता भुञ्जीत किल्विषम् अभोज्यं ब्राह्मणस्यान्नं वृषलेन निमन्त्रितम् ८
[The merits] do not accrue to the giver, while the eater incurs sin. Food belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, when one is invited to it by a Vṛṣala, is considered unfit to eat. ८

तथैव वृषलस्यान्नं ब्राह्मणेन निमन्त्रितम् ब्राह्मणान्नं ददच्छूद्रः शूद्रान्नं ब्राह्मणो ददत् ९
Likewise, the food of a Vṛṣala when a Brāhmaṇa invites [himself to it], and food of a Brāhmaṇa given by a Śūdra, or food of a Śūdra given by a Brāhmaṇa [are treated as unfit according to the text]. ९

उभावेतावभोज्यान्नौ भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् अमृतं ब्राह्मणस्यान्नं क्षत्रियान्नं पयः स्मृतम् १०
Both kinds of such food are considered unfit to eat; after eating them, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. The food of a Brāhmaṇa is regarded as nectar, while the food of a Kṣatriya is regarded as milk. १०


--- Page 8 ---

वैश्यस्य चान्नमेवान्नं शूद्रान्नं रुधिरं स्मृतम् शूद्रान्नेनोदरस्थेन योऽधिगच्छति मैथुनम् ११
The food of a Vaiśya is regarded simply as food, whereas the food of a Śūdra is regarded as blood. Whoever engages in sexual intercourse while Śūdra food is still in his stomach [incurs the prescribed consequence]. ११

यस्यान्नं तस्यते पुत्रा अन्नाच्छुक्रं प्रवर्त्तते शूद्रान्नरसपुष्टाङ्गोऽधीयानोऽपि च नित्यशः १२
The sons [of a man] are said to belong to the one whose food he consumes, for semen arises from food. Even if one whose body is nourished by the essence of Śūdra food continually studies [the Veda]... १२

जुह्वत् चापि जपन्वापि गतिमूर्द्धान्न विन्दति यस्तु वेदमधीयानः शूद्रान्नमुपभुञ्जते १३
...even while offering oblations or reciting sacred formulas, he does not attain the higher destination. Whoever studies the Veda while consuming Śūdra food [is subject to this consequence]. १३

शूद्रो वेदफलं याति शूद्रत्वं चाधिगच्छति मृतसूतकपुष्टाङ्गो द्विजः शूद्रान्नभोजनम् १४
The Śūdra [in such a case] obtains the fruit of the Veda, while [the twice-born person] attains Śūdra-hood. A twice-born whose body is nourished by the impurity arising from death and birth, and who eats Śūdra food... १४

अहमेवं न जानामि काङ्कां योनिङ्गमिष्यति श्वानस्तु सप्तजन्मानि नवजन्मानि शूकरः १५
“I do not know into which womb he will enter.” A dog [for] seven births and a pig [for] nine births [are mentioned as such destinations]. १५

गृध्रो द्वादशजन्मानि इत्येवं मनुरब्रवीत् परपाकमुपासन्ते ये द्विजा गृहमेधिनः १६
A vulture [for] twelve births—thus, Manu has declared. Those householders among the twice-born who habitually depend upon food cooked by others... १६

ते वै खरत्वमुष्ट्रत्वं श्वत्वञ्चैवाऽधिगच्छति श्राद्धं दत्वा च भुक्त्वा च मैथुनं योऽधिगच्छति १७
...attain the condition of a donkey, a camel, or a dog. Whoever engages in sexual intercourse after giving and eating Śrāddha food... १७

भवन्ति पितरस्तस्य तन्मासे रेतसो भुजः उच्छिष्टे न तु संस्पृष्टो द्रव्यहस्तः कथञ्चन १८
...his ancestors become eaters of his semen during that month. One whose hand is holding an object should not touch leftover food under any circumstances. १८

भूमौ निधाय तद्दव्यमाचान्तः शुचितामियात् स्पृशन्ति विन्दवः पादौ य आचामयतः परान् १९
Having placed that object upon the ground, one who has performed ācamana becomes pure. The drops [of water] touch the feet of one who performs ācamana for others. १९

भूमिगैस्ते समाज्ञेया न तैरप्रयतो भवेत् आचान्तोऽप्यशुचिस्तावद्यावत्पात्रमनुद्धतम् २०
Those drops should be regarded as having fallen upon the ground; one should not become impure because of them. Even after ācamana, one remains impure until the vessel [is properly] raised. २०

उद्धतेप्यशुचिस्तावद्यावन्मण्डलशोधनम् आसने पादमारोप्य ब्राह्मणो यस्तु भुञ्जते २१
Even after the vessel has been raised, impurity remains until the mandala has been cleansed. A Brāhmaṇa who eats while placing his foot upon the seat... २१

मुखेन वमितं चान्नं तुल्यं गोमांसभक्षणम् उपदंशान्नशेषं वा भोजने मुखनिःसृतम् २२
...and food vomited from the mouth is considered equivalent to eating cow's flesh. Likewise, food remaining from a side dish and coming out of the mouth during eating [is treated as impure]. २२

द्विजातीनामभोज्यान्नं भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् पीतशेषन्तु यत्तोयं ब्राह्मणः पिवते पुनः २३
After eating food that is forbidden for the twice-born, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. Whatever water remains after another has drunk it, if a Brāhmaṇa drinks it again... २३

अपेयं तद्भवेदापः पीत्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् अनुवंशन्तु भुञ्जीत नानुवंशन्तु संविशेत् २४
...that water becomes unfit to drink; after drinking it, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. One should eat while sitting in proper succession [along the meal arrangement], and should not lie down in that manner. २४

अनुवंशन्तु भुञ्जानो दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुयात् आर्द्रपादस्तु भुञ्जीत नार्द्रपादस्तु संविशेत् २५
One who eats in the prescribed arrangement obtains long life. One should eat with wet feet, but should not lie down with wet feet. २५


--- Page 9 ---

 
आर्द्रपादस्तु भुञ्जानो दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुयात् अनार्द्रपादः शयने दीर्घा श्रियमवाप्नुयात् २६
One who eats with wet feet attains long life; one who lies down with dry feet attains lasting prosperity. २६

आयुष्यं प्राङ्गखो भुङ्गे यशस्यं दक्षिणामुखः श्रियं प्रत्यङ्गुरवे भुङ्गे ऋतं भुङ्ग उदङ्गुखः २७
One should eat facing east for longevity, facing south for fame, facing west for prosperity, and facing north for the attainment of truth. २७

शावे शवगृहं गत्वा श्मशाने वान्तरेऽपि वा आतुरं व्यञ्जनं कृत्वा दूरस्थोऽप्यशुचिर्भवेत् २८
Having gone to a house where a corpse lies, or to a cremation ground or an intervening place, one who prepares food or a side dish for the afflicted [mourner] becomes impure even if he remains at a distance. २८

अतिक्रान्ते दशाहे तु त्रिरात्रमशुचिर्भवेत् सम्वत्सरे व्यतीते तु स्पृष्ट्वापो विशुध्यति २९
After ten days have passed, one remains impure for three nights; after a year has passed, one becomes purified simply by touching water. २९

निर्देशं ज्ञातिमरणं श्रुत्वा पुत्रस्य जन्म च सवासा जलमाप्लुत्य शुद्धो भवति मानवः ३०
Upon hearing of the death of a relative or the birth of a son, a person becomes purified by bathing fully clothed in water. ३०

अशुद्धं स्वयमप्यन्नं न शुद्धस्तु यदि स्पृशेत् विशुध्यत्युपवासेन भुङ्गे कृच्छ्रेण स द्विजः ३१
Food that is itself impure should not be touched by one who is impure. He becomes purified by fasting; if he eats it, the twice-born should perform a Kṛcchra penance. ३१

सूतके सूतकं स्पृष्ट्वा स्त्रानं शावे च सूतके सूतकेनैव शुद्धिः स्यान्मृतस्यान्निर्दशे शुचिः ३२
When one in a period of birth impurity touches another person undergoing birth impurity, bathing is prescribed; likewise in death impurity. In the case of death, purification occurs through the corresponding impurity period, and after the tenth day one becomes pure. ३२

सूतके सूतकं स्पृष्ट्वा स्त्रानं शावे च सूतके भुक्त्वा पीत्वा तदज्ञानादुपवासत्र्यहं भवेत् ३३
When one undergoing birth impurity touches another undergoing birth impurity, bathing is prescribed; likewise in death impurity. If one unknowingly eats or drinks during such a period, a three-day fast should be undertaken. ३३

मृण्मयानाञ्च पात्राणां दशाहे शुचिरिष्यते स्त्रानादिषु प्रयुक्तानां त्याग एव विधीयते ३४
Earthen vessels are regarded as purified after ten days; those used for bathing and similar purposes are prescribed to be discarded. ३४

सूतके मृतके चैव मृतान्ते च प्रसूतके तस्मात्तु शङ्गताशौचे मृताशौचे न शुध्यति ३५
In cases of birth impurity, death impurity, impurity following a death, and impurity following childbirth, [the prescribed rules apply]; therefore, impurity arising from association does not become purified during the period of death impurity. ३५

सूतकाद्विगुणं शावं शावाद्विगुणमार्त्तवम् आर्त्तवाद् द्विगुणा सूतिस्ततोऽधिशवदाहकः ३६
Death impurity is twice the duration of birth impurity; menstrual impurity is twice that of death impurity; birth impurity is twice that of menstrual impurity, and beyond these is the impurity of the cremator of a corpse. ३६

अनुगच्छेद्यथा प्रेतं ज्ञातिमज्ञातिमेव वा स्नात्वा सचैलं स्पृष्ट्वाग्निं घृतं प्राश्य विशुध्यति ३७
Whoever follows a dead person, whether a relative or a stranger, becomes purified by bathing with his clothes on, touching fire, and consuming ghee. ३७

रजता शुध्यते नारी नदी वेगेन शुध्यति भस्मना शुध्यते कांस्यं पुनः पाकेन मृण्मयम् ३८
Silver is purified [by the prescribed process], a woman is purified by the force of a river, bronze by ashes, and an earthen vessel again by firing. ३८

--- Page 10 ---

नोदन्वतोऽम्भसि स्त्रानं क्षुरकर्म तथैव च अन्तर्वत्त्रया पतिः कुर्वन्न प्रजा भवति ध्रुवम् ३९
One should not bathe in water that is not flowing, nor perform shaving in such water; a husband who performs intercourse with his wife while she is menstruating is certainly deprived of offspring. ३९

दम्पती शुशुना सार्द्ध सूतके दशमेऽहनि क्षौरं कुर्यात्ततः पूतादानभोजनयोग्यता ४०
The husband and wife, together with the child, should undergo shaving on the tenth day of the birth-impurity; thereafter they become eligible to give gifts and partake of food. ४०

केशादि दूषिते तीरे न कुर्यात्तिलतर्पणम् जलमध्ये जलं देयं पितॄणां जलमिच्छताम् घनस्थाने न दातव्यं पितॄणां नोपगच्छति ४१
One should not perform the sesame-water offering to the ancestors on a bank polluted by hair and other impurities. Water should be offered in the midst of water to the ancestors who desire water; it should not be offered in a dense or obstructed place, for it does not reach the ancestors. ४१

रात्रिं कुर्यात् त्रिभागन्तु द्वौ भागौ पूर्व एव च उत्तरांशः प्रभातेन युज्यते मृतसूतके ४२
The night should be divided into three parts; the first two parts belong to the preceding day, while the final part is joined to the following day at dawn, in determining the period of death-impurity. ४२

यदि पश्येदृतुंपूर्वं क्रूरवारे मृतिः स्मृता इति पश्येत्तु भुक्त्वा तु पादुकारोहणं स्मृतम् स्त्रात्वैन्द्रव्रतमादाय देवताभ्यो निवेदयेत् ४३
If menstruation is seen before its proper time, death is said to occur on an inauspicious day. If it is seen, after eating one should put on footwear; after bathing, one should undertake the Indra-vrata and make an offering to the deities. ४३

अपूपं लवणं मुद्द्रं गुडमिश्र तथा हविः दक्त्वा ब्राह्मणपत्नीभ्यो निशि भोजनमेव च ४४
One should give cakes, salt, pulses, and offerings mixed with jaggery to the wives of Brahmins, and should also provide them with food at night. ४४

चतुर्थेऽहनि कर्त्तव्यं क्षुरकर्मातियत्नतः पुण्याहं वाचयित्वान्ते भोक्तव्यं शुद्धिमिच्छता ४५
On the fourth day, shaving should be performed with great care. After having the auspicious declaration recited, one who desires purification should eat at the end. ४५

अपुण्याहे तु भुञ्जीत विप्रो धर्ममजानतः तस्य जातिमयं भुङ्गे प्रायश्चित्तं ध्रुवं भवेत् ४६
If a Brahmin, ignorant of the prescribed dharma, eats on a day that has not been declared auspicious, he incurs a definite penance for having violated the rules of his caste. ४६

विवाहे वितते तन्त्रे होमकाल उपस्थिते कन्यामृतुमतीं दृष्ट्वा कथं कुर्वन्ति याज्ञिकाः ४७
When a marriage ritual is underway and the time for the homa has arrived, what should the ritual priests do if they find that the maiden has begun menstruating? ४७

हविस्मत्या स्त्रापयित्वा त्वन्यवस्त्रमलङ्कृताम् युञ्जानामाहुतिं कृत्वा ततः कर्म प्रवर्त्तते ४८
They should bathe her with the prescribed offering substance, clothe her in fresh garments, adorn her, and after making the appropriate joining-offering, the ritual may proceed. ४८

प्रथमेऽहनि चाण्डाली द्वितीये ब्रह्मघातकी तृतीये रजकी प्रोक्ता चतुर्थेऽहनि शुध्यति ४९
On the first day she is declared to be like a Chāṇḍālī, on the second like a slayer of a Brahmin, and on the third like a washerwoman; on the fourth day she becomes purified. ४९

आर्त्तवाभिप्लुतां नारीं चण्डालं पतितं शुनम् भोज्यान्तरे प्रयुज्यन्ते स्त्रात्वा मानस्तृचं जपेत् ५०
A woman affected by menstruation, a Chāṇḍāla, an outcast, or a dog, if they come into contact with food, are dealt with according to the prescribed purification; after bathing, one should recite the Mānastṛca hymn. ५०

--- Page 11 ---


आर्त्तवाभिप्लुतां नारीं दृष्ट्वा भुङ्गेऽन्धकातराः तदन्नं छर्दयित्वा तु कुशवारि पिवेदपः ५१
If one sees a menstruating woman and, through blindness or confusion, eats the food associated with her, he should vomit that food and drink water purified with kuśa grass. ५१

ये तां दत्वा तु यो भुङ्गे प्राजापत्यं विशोधनम् आर्त्तवाभिप्लुतां नारीं आर्त्तवाभिप्लुताभिधः ५२
Whoever gives food to such a woman and then eats it should perform the Prājāpatya penance for purification; one who is associated with a menstruating woman is likewise considered affected by that contact. ५२

भाषयित्वा तु संमोहादुपवासस्तयोर्भवेत् उदक्यायाः करेणाथ भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ५३
If, through confusion, one speaks with her, both should undertake a fast; if one eats food from the hand of a menstruating woman, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ५३

प्राजापत्यमसत्याच्चेत्त्रिरात्रं स्पृष्टभोजने तद्धस्तभोजनञ्चैव त्रिगुणं सह भोजने ५४
For falsehood, the Prājāpatya penance is prescribed; for eating food that has been touched by her, a three-night penance is prescribed; eating food directly from her hand is three times that; and eating together with her is likewise prescribed with a threefold penalty. ५४

चतुर्गुणं तदुच्छिष्टे पानीये त्वर्द्धमेव च उदक्यायाः समीपस्थ मन्नं भुक्त्वात्वकामतः ५५
For eating her remnants, the penance is fourfold; for drinking water touched by her, it is half as much. If one unintentionally eats food situated near a menstruating woman, the prescribed purification is to be undertaken. ५५

उपवासेन शुद्धिः स्यात्पिवेद् ब्रह्म सुवर्चलम् आर्त्तवा यदि चाण्डालमुच्छिष्टेन तु पश्यति ५६
Purification is attained through fasting, and one should drink the prescribed Brahma-suvarchala preparation. If a menstruating woman sees a Chāṇḍāla or food left as another's remnant, the corresponding purification is prescribed. ५६

आस्त्रानकालं नाश्रीयादासीना वाग्यता बहिः पादकृच्छ्रन्तु यः कुर्याद्ब्रह्मकृच्छ्रं पिवेत् पुनः ५७
During the prescribed bathing period she should not eat; sitting outside, she should remain silent. One who performs the Pādakṛcchra should thereafter drink the Brahmakṛcchra preparation. ५७

ब्राह्मणान् भोजयेत्पश्चाद्विप्राणामनुशासनात् मृतसूतकसम्पर्क ऋतुं दृष्ट्वा कथं भवेत् ५८
Afterward, she should feed Brahmins according to the instruction of learned Brahmins. If she encounters someone under the impurity associated with death or birth, the prescribed purification is to be observed. ५८

आस्त्रानकालं नाश्नीयाद्भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् आर्त्तवाभिप्लुता नारी चण्डालं स्पृशते यदि ५९
She should not eat during the prescribed bathing period; if she does eat, she should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. If a menstruating woman touches a Chāṇḍāla, the prescribed purification must be performed. ५९

आर्त्तवाभिप्लुता नारीं आर्त्तवाभिप्लुता स्पृशेत् स्त्रात्वोपवासं कुर्याच्च पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ६०
If one menstruating woman touches another menstruating woman, she should bathe and undertake a fast; she becomes purified through Pañcagavya. ६०

कृच्छ्रमेकञ्चरेत्सा तु तदर्थं चान्तरीकृते आतुरा या ऋतुस्त्राता स्नानकर्म कथं भवेत् ६१
She should perform one Kṛcchra penance when such contact has occurred. As for a woman who is ill and has undergone menstruation, the procedure for bathing is as follows. ६१

स्त्रात्वा स्त्रात्वा पुनःस्पृश्य दशकृत्वस्त्वनातुराः वस्त्रापनयनं कृत्वा भस्मना परिमार्जयेत् ६२
A woman who is not ill should bathe repeatedly, and after bathing should touch herself ten times; she should remove her garments and cleanse herself with sacred ash. ६२

दत्त्वा तु शक्तितो दानं पुण्याहेन विशुध्यति ब्रह्मणानां करैर्मुक्तं तोयं शिरसि धारयेत् ६३
She should then give a donation according to her means and be purified through the auspicious rite; she should pour upon her head water released through the hands of Brahmins. ६३

--- Page 12 ---

सर्वतीर्थतटात्पुण्याद्विशिष्टतरमुच्यते रजस्वलायाः प्रेतायाः संस्कारं नाचरेद्विजः ६४
It is said to be more meritorious than the sacred banks of all holy places; a twice-born should not perform the funeral rites of a woman who dies while menstruating. ६४

ऊर्ध्वं त्रिरात्रात्स्त्रातायाः शावधर्मेण दाहयेत् रजस्वले च द्वे स्पृष्टे चातुर्वर्णस्य याः स्त्रियः ६५
After three nights have passed following her bath, her body should be cremated according to the rites prescribed for the dead. If two menstruating women of the four varṇas touch one another, the prescribed penances are to be performed. ६५

अतिकृच्छ्रं चरेत्पूर्वं कृच्छ्रमेकं क्रमेण तु रजस्वलायाः स्त्रातायाः पुनरेव रजस्वला ६६
The first should perform an Atikṛcchra penance and the other a Kṛcchra penance, respectively, if a woman who has bathed after menstruation becomes menstruating again. ६६

विंशतेर्दिवसादूर्ध्वं त्रिरात्रमशुचिर्भवेत् प्रसूतिका तु या नारी स्नानतो विंशतेः परम् ६७
If menstruation occurs again after twenty days, she is considered impure for three nights. A woman who has recently given birth, after twenty days from her bath, is likewise described in relation to menstrual impurity. ६७

रजस्वला तु सा प्रोक्ता प्राक्तु नैमित्तिकं रजः शुद्धा नारी शुद्धवासाः पुनरार्तवदर्शने ६८
She is then considered menstruating, whereas the earlier discharge is regarded as incidental. Upon the next occurrence of menstruation, a woman should purify herself and put on clean garments. ६८

वस्त्रं तु मलिनं त्यक्त्वा तिलमाप्लुत्य शुध्यति आतुर स्त्रानसंप्राप्तौ दशकृत्वस्त्वनातुरः ६९
After discarding soiled clothing and bathing with water containing sesame, she becomes purified. When a sick woman is able to bathe, a woman who is not ill should touch her ten times after bathing. ६९

स्त्रात्वा स्त्रात्वा स्पृशेदेनं ततः शुद्धो भविष्यति चन्द्रसूर्यग्रहे नाद्यात्स्त्रात्वा मुक्ते तु भुञ्जते ७०
After bathing repeatedly, she should touch this person, and thereafter purification is attained. One should not eat during a lunar or solar eclipse; after bathing when the eclipse has ended, one may eat. ७०

अमुक्तयो रस्तगयो रद्याद्दष्ट्वा परेऽहनि यस्य स्वजन्मनक्षत्रे गृह्येते शशिभास्करौ ७१
If the eclipse has not yet ended, one should not eat; if the Sun or Moon is eclipsed on one's birth constellation, the prescribed observances should be followed on the following day. ७१

व्याधिः प्रवाहे मृत्युश्च दारिद्युञ्च महद्भयम् तस्माद्दानं च होमञ्च देवताभ्यर्चनं जपम् ७२
Disease, calamity, death, poverty, and great danger are said to result; therefore, on that day one should perform charity, homa, worship of the deities, and japa. ७२

कुर्यात्तस्मिन् दिने युक्ते तस्य शान्तिर्भविष्यति सर्वं गङ्गासमं तोयं राहुग्रस्ते दिवाकरे ७३
When these observances are properly performed on that day, peace and relief will result. When the Sun is eclipsed by Rāhu, all water is considered equivalent to the waters of the Ganges. ७३

यो नरः स्नाति तत्तीर्थे समुद्रे सेतुबन्धने उपोष्य रजनीमेकां राहुग्रस्ते दिवाकरे ७४
A person who bathes at such a sacred place, at the sea, or at Setubandha, while fasting for one night during a solar eclipse caused by Rāhu, ७४

सप्तजन्मकृतं पापं तत्क्षणादेव नश्यति सोमेऽप्येवं सूर्यतुल्यं तस्मात्सर्वं समाचरेत् ७५
has the sins accumulated over seven births destroyed immediately. The same applies in the case of a lunar eclipse as in a solar eclipse; therefore, one should perform all these observances. ७५

Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Ātreya Smṛti.

--- Page 13 ---

इष्ट्वा क्रतुशतैरेवं देवराजो महाद्युतिः स्वगुरुं वाग्मिनां श्रेष्ठं पर्यपृच्छद्बहस्पतिम् १
Having performed hundreds of sacrifices in this manner, the illustrious king of the gods, Indra, approached and asked his preceptor, Bṛhaspati, the foremost among eloquent speakers. १

भगवन् केन दानेन स्वर्गतः सुखमेधते यदक्षयं महाभाग त्वं ब्रूहि वदताम्बर २
O Blessed One, by what gift does a person attain lasting happiness in heaven? O greatly fortunate one, tell me of that which is imperishable. २

एवं पृष्टः स इन्द्रेण देवदेवपुरोहितः वाचस्पतिर्महातेजो बृहस्पतिरुवाच ह ३
Thus questioned by Indra, the great-radiant Bṛhaspati, the preceptor of the gods and Vācaspati, spoke. ३

हिरण्यदानं गोदानं भूमिदानञ्च वासवः एतत्प्रयच्छमानोऽपि स्वर्गतःसुखमेधते ४
O Vāsava, the gift of gold, the gift of cows, and the gift of land—by giving these, a person attains increasing happiness in heaven. ४

सुवर्णं रजतं वस्त्रं मणिरत्नं वसूनि च सर्वमेव भवेद्दत्तं वसुधां यः प्रयच्छति ५
Gold, silver, garments, jewels, precious stones, and all other forms of wealth are considered as given when one gives the earth. ५

फलाकृष्टां महीं दद्यात्सबीजां सस्यमालिनीम् यावत्सूर्यकरा लोके तावत्सर्गे महीयते ६
One should give cultivated land that bears crops, furnished with seeds and rich with vegetation; for as long as the rays of the Sun endure in the world, so long does the giver attain glory in heaven. ६

इति आत्रेयस्मृतौ धर्मशास्त्रं सम्पूर्णम्
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra of the Ātreya Smṛti.



