--- Page 1 ---
औशनस स्मृतिः 
Aushanasa smriti

अथ औशनस संहिता
Aushanasa sanhita 

श्रीगणेशाय नमः
salutations to ganesha

अथानुलोमप्रतिलोमजात्यन्तराणां निरूपणवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the classification of Anuloma and Pratiloma inter-caste unions and the rules concerning the resulting castes.

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि जातिवृत्तिविधानकम् अनुलोमविधानञ्च प्रतिलोमविधिं तथा १
From this point onward, I shall explain the rules concerning the occupations of the various castes, as well as the rules of Anuloma and Pratiloma unions. १

सान्तरालकसंयुक्तं सर्वं संक्षिप्य चोच्यते नृपाद्ब्राह्मणकन्यायां विवाहेषु समन्वयात् २
All these matters, including the intermediate classes, will now be stated briefly, beginning with the unions arising from the king and the Brāhmaṇa woman, according to the combinations in marriage. २

जातः सूतोऽत्र निर्दिष्टः प्रतिलोमविधिर्द्विजः वेदानहस्तथा चैषां धर्माणामनुबोधकः ३
The offspring born from such a union is designated a Sūta; this is an example of the Pratiloma rule. Though twice-born, he is not entitled to the Vedas and is to be instructed in these duties. ३

सूताद्विप्र प्रसूतायां सूतो वेणुक उच्यते नृपायामेव तस्यैव जातो यश्चर्मकारकः ४
A son born to a Sūta father and a Brāhmaṇa woman is called a Veṇuka; when the same [Sūta] has a son by a king's woman, that offspring is called a Carmakāraka. ४

ब्राह्मण्यां क्षत्त्रियाच्चौर्याद्रथकारः प्रजायते वृत्तञ्च शूद्रवृत्तस्य द्विजत्वं प्रतिषिध्यते ५
From a Brāhmaṇa woman and a Kṣatriya man is born a Rathakāra; his occupation is that of a Śūdra, and his status as twice-born is prohibited. ५

यानानां ये च वोढारस्तेषाञ्च परिचारकाः शूद्रवृत्त्या तु जीवन्ति न क्षात्त्रं धर्ममाचरेत् ६
Those who carry vehicles and those who serve them live by the occupation of Śūdras; they should not practice the duties prescribed for Kṣatriyas. ६

ब्राह्मण्यां वैश्यसंसर्गाज्जातोमागध उच्यते वन्दित्वं ब्राह्मणानाञ्च क्षत्त्रियाणां विशेषतः ७
One born from the union of a Brāhmaṇa woman with a Vaiśya is called a Māgadha; his occupation is praising and eulogizing Brāhmaṇas and especially Kṣatriyas. ७

प्रशंसावृत्तिको जीवेद्वैश्यप्रेष्यकरस्तथा ब्राह्मण्यां शूद्रसंसर्गाज्जातश्चाण्डाल उच्यते ८
He should live by the occupation of praise and eulogy and by serving Vaiśyas. One born from the union of a Brāhmaṇa woman with a Śūdra is called a Cāṇḍāla. ८

सीसमाभरणं तस्य कार्णायसमथापि वा वध्रीं कण्ठे समावध्य झल्लरीं कक्षतोऽपि वा ९
He should wear ornaments made of lead or black iron; he should fasten a leather strap around his neck and may also wear a bell at his waist. ९

मल्लापकर्षणं ग्रामे पूर्वाह्ने परिशुद्धिकम् नापराले प्रविष्टोऽपि वहिर्गामाच्च नैर्ऋते १०
In the village, he should perform the removal of refuse before midday as a means of purification; he should not enter [the village] in the afternoon, but should remain outside the village, toward the southwest. १०

पिण्डीभूता भवन्त्यत्र नोचेद् बध्या विशेषतः चाण्डालाद्वैश्यकन्यायां जातः श्वप च उच्यते ११
Here [such persons] become gathered together in groups; otherwise, they are especially to be slain. One born from a Cāṇḍāla father and a Vaiśya woman is called a Śvapaca. ११


--- Page 2 ---

श्वमांसभक्षणं तेषां श्वान एव च तद्बलम् नृपायां वैश्यसंसर्गादायोगव इति स्मृतः १२
The eating of dog-flesh is their practice, and dogs themselves are their means of livelihood. One born from a king's woman through union with a Vaiśya is known as an Āyogava. १२

तन्तुवाया भवन्त्येव वसुकांस्योपजीविनः शीलिकाः केचिदत्रैव जीवनं वस्त्रनिर्मिते १३
They become weavers, earning their livelihood through [work with] woven materials and bell-metal; some are Śīlikas, making their living by manufacturing garments. १३

आयोगवेन विप्रायां जातास्ताम्रोपजीविनः तस्यैव नृपकन्यायां जातः सूनिक उच्यते १४
Those born from an Āyogava and a Brāhmaṇa woman earn their livelihood from copper; one born from the same [Āyogava] by a king's daughter is called a Sūnika. १४

सूनिकस्य नृपायान्तु जाता उद्बन्धकाः स्मृताः निर्णेजयेयुर्वस्त्राणि अस्पृश्याश्च भवन्त्यतः १५
Those born from a Sūnika and a king's woman are known as Udbandhakas; they wash and clean garments and are consequently regarded as untouchable. १५

नृपायां वैश्यतश्चौर्यात्पुलिन्दः परिकीर्तितः पशुवृत्तिभवेत्तस्य हन्युस्तान् दुष्टसत्वकान् १६
One born from a king's woman and a Vaiśya through theft is called a Pulinda; his occupation is connected with animals, and he should kill harmful creatures. १६

नृपायां शूद्रसंसर्गाज्जातः पक्कश उच्यते सुरावृत्तिं समारुह्य मधुविक्रयकर्मणा १७
One born from a king's woman through union with a Śūdra is called a Pakkaśa; adopting the occupation associated with liquor, he earns his livelihood by selling honey. १७

कृतकानां सुराणाञ्च विक्रेता याचको भवेत् पुक्कशाद्वैश्यकन्यायां जातो रजक उच्यते १८
The seller of prepared liquors becomes a petitioner; one born from a Pukkaśa and a Vaiśya woman is called a Rajaka, a washerman. १८

नृपायां शूद्रतश्चौर्याज्जातो रञ्जक उच्यते वैश्यायां रज्ज्ञ्जकाज्जातो नर्त्तको गायको भवेत् १९
One born from a king's woman and a Śūdra through theft is called a Rañjaka, a dyer; one born from a Rañjaka and a Vaiśya woman becomes a dancer and singer. १९

वैश्यायां शूद्रसंसर्गाज्जातो वैदेहिकः स्मृतः अजानां पालनं कुर्यान्महिषीणां गवामपि २०
One born from a Vaiśya woman through union with a Śūdra is known as a Vaidehaka; he should tend goats, buffaloes, and cattle. २०

दधिक्षीराज्यतक्राणां विक्रयाज्जीवनं भवेत् वैदेहिकात्तु विप्रायां जाताश्चर्मोपजीविनः २१
He should earn his livelihood by selling curds, milk, ghee, and buttermilk. Those born from a Vaidehaka and a Brāhmaṇa woman earn their livelihood from leather. २१

नृपायामेव तस्यैव स्त्रचिकः पाचकः स्मृतः वैश्यायां शूद्रतश्चौर्याजातश्चक्री च उच्यते २२
From that same [union] with a king's woman is born a Stracika, who is known as a cook; one born from a Vaiśya woman and a Śūdra through theft is called a Cakrī. २२

तैलपिष्टकजीवी तु लवणं भावयन् पुनः विधिना ब्राह्मणः प्राप्य नृपायान्तु समन्त्रकम् २३
He earns his livelihood from oil and cakes and, in addition, deals in salt; when a Brāhmaṇa properly approaches a king's woman with the prescribed mantra... २३

जातः सुवर्ण इत्युक्तः सानुलोमद्विजः स्मृतः अथ वर्णक्रियां कुर्वन्नित्यनैमित्तिकीं क्रियाम् २४
The offspring born [from this union] is called Suvarṇa and is regarded as an Anuloma twice-born. Thereafter, performing the rites prescribed for his varṇa, he should undertake the regular and occasional duties. २४


--- Page 3 ---

अश्वं रथं हस्तिनं वा वाहयेद्वा नृपाज्ञया सैनापत्यञ्च भैषज्यं कुर्याजीवेत्तु वृत्तिषु २५
By the king's command, he may drive a horse, chariot, or elephant, or serve as a military commander or practice medicine; he should earn his livelihood through these occupations. २५

नृपायां विप्रतश्चौर्यात्संजातो यो भिषक्स्मृतः अभिषिक्तनृपस्याज्ञां परिपाल्येत्तु वैद्यकम् २६
One born from a Brāhmaṇa and a king's woman through theft is known as a physician; he should practice medicine in accordance with the command of the consecrated king. २६

आयुर्वेदमथाष्टाङ्गं तन्त्रोक्तं धर्ममाचरेत् ज्यौतिषं गणितं वाऽपि कायिकीं वृत्तिमाचरेत् २७
He should practice Āyurveda with its eight branches, follow the disciplines prescribed in the Tantras, and may practice astrology, mathematics, or a bodily occupation. २७

नृपायां विधिना विप्राज्जातो नृप इति स्मृतः नृपायां नृपसंसर्गात्प्रमादाढूढजातकः २८
One born from a Brāhmaṇa and a king's woman according to the prescribed rule is known as a Nṛpa; one born from a king's woman and a king through an irregular union is called an Āḍhūḍhajātaka. २८

सोऽपि क्षत्त्रिय एव स्यादभिषेके च वर्जितः अभिषेकं विना प्राप्य गोज इत्यभिधायकः २९
He too is regarded as a Kṣatriya, but is excluded from consecration; without consecration, he is designated a Goja. २९

सर्वन्तु राजवृत्तस्य शस्यते पदवन्दनम् पुनर्भूकरणे राज्ञां नृपकानीन एव च ३०
For all who follow the royal occupation, bowing at the king's feet is prescribed; in the case of a remarried woman, the offspring belonging to kings is likewise designated a Kānin. ३०

वैश्यायां विधिना विप्राञ्जातो ह्यम्वष्ठ उच्यते कृष्याजीवो भवेत्तस्य तथैवाग्नेयवृत्तिकः ३१
One born from a Brāhmaṇa and a Vaiśya woman according to the prescribed rule is called an Ambaṣṭha; his livelihood should be agriculture, and likewise an occupation connected with fire. ३१

ध्वजिनी जीविका वाऽपि अम्बष्ठाः शस्त्रजीविनः वैश्यायां विप्रतश्चौर्यात्कुम्भकारः स उच्यते ३२
They may also earn their livelihood through military service; the Ambaṣṭhas are practitioners of occupations involving weapons. One born from a Brāhmaṇa and a Vaiśya woman through theft is called a Kumbhakāra, a potter. ३२

कुलालवृत्त्या जीवेत नापिता वा भवन्त्यतः सूतके प्रेतके वाऽपि दीक्षाकालेऽथ वापनम् ३३
He should live by the occupation of a potter; alternatively, such persons may become barbers. Therefore, shaving is performed by them during periods of birth or death impurity and at the time of initiation. ३३

नाभेरूङ्गं तु वपनं तस्मान्नापित उच्यते कायस्थ इति जीवेत्तु विचरेच्च इतस्ततः ३४
The shaving of the body above the navel is prescribed; hence he is called a Nāpitā, a barber. A Kāyastha should earn his livelihood by moving about from place to place. ३४

काकाल्लौल्यं यमात्क्रौर्यं स्थपतेरथ कृन्तनम् आद्याक्षराणि संगृह्य कायस्थ इति कीर्तितः ३५
From the crow comes restlessness, from Yama cruelty, and from the Sthapati cutting; taking their initial letters, he is designated a Kāyastha. ३५

शूद्रायां विधिना विप्राज्जातः पारशवोमतः भद्रकादीन् समाश्रित्य जीवेयुः पूजकाः स्मृताः ३६
One born from a Brāhmaṇa and a Śūdra woman according to the prescribed rule is regarded as a Pāraśava; taking up the occupations of Bhadrakas and others, they should live as worshippers. ३६

शिवाद्यागमविद्याद्यैस्तथामण्डलवृत्तिभिः तस्यां वै चौरसो वृत्तो निषादो जात उच्यते ३७
Through knowledge of the Āgamas beginning with those concerning Śiva, and through occupations connected with sacred circles and related practices, [one follows such a livelihood]; from her, when born through an irregular union, the offspring is called a Niṣāda. ३७

--- Page 4 ---

वने दुष्टमृगान् हत्वा जीवनं मांसविक्रयम् नृपाज्जातोऽथ वैश्यायां गृह्यायां विधिना सुतः ३८
He lives by killing harmful wild animals in the forest and selling their meat. Born from a king and a Vaiśya woman according to the prescribed law, he is known as a son of that union. ३८

वैश्यवृत्या तु जीवेत क्षात्त्रधर्मं न चाचरेत् तस्यां तस्यैव चौरेण मणिकारः प्रजायते ३९
He should live by the occupation of a Vaiśya and should not practice the duties of a Kṣatriya. From that same union, when born through theft or improper conduct, a Maṇikāra is produced. ३९

मणीनां राजतां कुर्यान्मुक्तानां वेधनक्रियाम् प्रवालानाञ्च सूत्रित्वं शाखानां बलयक्रियाम् ४०
He should polish and work precious stones, pierce pearls, string coral, and make bracelets from branches and other materials. ४०

शूद्रस्य विप्रसंसर्गाज्जात उग्र इति स्मृतः नृपस्य दण्डधारः स्याद्दण्डं दण्डयेषु सञ्चरेत् ४१
One born from the union of a Śūdra with a Brāhmaṇa is called an Ugra. He should serve the king as a bearer of the staff of punishment and move among those who are to be punished. ४१

तस्यैव चौरसंवृस्या जातः शुण्डिक उच्यते जातदुष्टान् समारोप्य शुण्डाकर्मणि योजयेत् ४२
One born from that same union through theft or improper conduct is called a Śuṇḍika. He should take those who have become corrupt and employ them in the work associated with the Śuṇḍa. ४२

शूद्रायां वैश्यसंसर्गाद्विधिना सूचकः स्मृतः सूचकाद्विप्रकन्यायां जातस्तक्षक उच्यते ४३
One born from the prescribed union of a Śūdra with a Vaiśya woman is known as a Sūcaka. One born from a Sūcaka and a Brāhmaṇa maiden is called a Takṣaka. ४३

शिल्पकर्माणि चान्यानि प्रासादलक्षणं तथा नृपायामेव तस्यैव जातो यो मत्स्यबाधकः ४४
He should perform various kinds of craftsmanship and the construction and design of buildings and temples. From that same lineage, when born from a king's family, one who catches fish is known as a Matsyabādhaka. ४४

शूद्रायां वैश्यतश्चौर्यात् कटकार इति स्मृतः वशिष्ठशापात्त्रेतायां केचित् पारशवास्तथा ४५
One born from a Vaiśya and a Śūdra woman through theft or improper union is known as a Kaṭakāra. Because of the curse of Vasiṣṭha, some are said to have become Pāraśavas in the Tretā Yuga. ४५

वैखानसेन केचित्तु केचिद्भागवतेन च वेदशास्त्राबलम्वास्ते भविष्यन्ति कलौ युगे ४६
Some will follow the Vaikhānasa tradition, while others will follow the Bhāgavata tradition; in the Kali Yuga, they will depend upon the authority of the Vedas and scriptures. ४६

कटकारास्ततः पश्चान्नारायणगणाः स्मृताः शाखा वैखानसेनोक्ता तन्त्रमार्गविधिक्रियाः ४७
Thereafter, the Kaṭakāras are known as the followers of Nārāyaṇa. The branch called Vaikhānasa is said to prescribe the rites and practices of the Tantric path. ४७

निषेकाद्याः श्मशानान्ताः क्रियाः पूजाङ्गसूचिकाः पञ्चरात्रेण वा प्राप्तं प्रोक्तं धर्मं समाचरेत् ४८
The rites beginning with conception and extending up to the cremation rites, together with the observances connected with worship, should be performed according to the Pañcarātra tradition, or according to the prescribed Dharma that has been received. ४८

शूद्रादेव तु शूद्रायां जातः शूद्र इति स्मृतः द्विजशुश्रूषणपरः पाकयज्ञपरान्वितः ४९
One born from a Śūdra father and a Śūdra woman is known as a Śūdra. He should be devoted to serving the twice-born and should engage in the rites of domestic sacrificial offerings. ४९

सच्छूद्रं तं विजानीयादसच्छूद्रस्ततोऽन्यथा चौर्यात्काकवचो ज्ञेयश्चाश्वानां तृणवाहकः ५०
He should be regarded as a good Śūdra; otherwise, he is an inferior Śūdra. One born through theft or improper conduct is known as a Kākavaca and is employed as a carrier of grass for horses. ५०

एतत्संक्षेपतः प्रोक्तं जातिवृत्तिविभागशः जात्यन्तराणि दृश्यन्ते संकल्पादित एव तु ५१
Thus, the divisions of castes and their occupations have been described briefly. Other intermediate castes are seen to arise through various unions and circumstances beginning with the intentions and arrangements of such unions. ५१

इत्यौशनसं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम् शुक्रसंहिता समाप्ता
Thus ends the Auśanasa Dharmaśāstra; thus ends the Śukra Saṃhitā.
