--- Page 1 ---
अथ बृहस्पतिस्मृतिः
श्रीगणेशाय नमः

तत्रादौससुवर्णपृथिवीदानफलमहत्ववर्णनम्
Here, first is described the greatness of the fruits obtained from the gifts of gold and land.

इष्ट्वा क्रतुशतं राजा समाप्तवरदक्षिणम् मघवान् वाग्विदां श्रेष्ठं पर्य्यपृच्छद् बृहस्पतिम् १
Having performed a hundred sacrifices with abundant gifts as sacrificial fees, King Maghavan asked Bṛhaspati, the foremost among those learned in speech. १

भगवन् केन दानेन सर्वतः सुखमेधते यद्दत्तं यन्महार्घ च तन्मे ब्रूहि महातप २
O Lord, by what kind of gift does one prosper in happiness in every way? Tell me, O great ascetic, what gift is most precious and worthy of being given. २

एवमिन्द्रेण पृष्टोऽसौ देवदेवपुरोहितः वाचस्पतिर्महाप्राज्ञो बृहस्पतिरुवाच ह ३
Thus questioned by Indra, Bṛhaspati, the highly wise Vācaspati, the priest of the gods, spoke. ३

सुवर्णदानं रोदानं भूमिदानं च वासव एतत् प्रयच्छमानस्तु सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते ४
O Vāsava, the gift of gold, the gift of wealth, and the gift of land are supreme; one who gives these is freed from all sins. ४

सुवर्ण रजतं वस्त्रं मणिरत्नं च वासव सर्वमेव भवेद्दत्तं वसुधां यः प्रयच्छति ५
O Vāsava, whoever gives the earth gives, as it were, gold, silver, garments, jewels, and precious gems—all of these. ५

फालकृष्टां महीं दत्त्वा सबीजां शस्यशालिनीम् यावत् सूर्य्यकरा लोकास्तावत् स्वर्गे महीयते ६
Having given cultivated land, containing seeds and rich in crops, one is honored in heaven for as long as the rays of the sun endure in the worlds. ६

यत्किञ्चित् कुरुते पापं पुरुषो वृत्तिकर्शितः अपि गोचर्म्ममात्रेण भूमिदानेन शुध्यति ७
Whatever sin a person afflicted by poverty may commit, he is purified even by donating land equal in extent to a cowhide. ७

दशहस्तेन दण्डेन त्रिंशद्दण्डानि वर्त्तनम् दश तान्येव विस्तारो गोचर्मे तन्महाफलम् ८
A measuring rod of ten hands makes thirty such rods in length, and ten of these in breadth; this is called a cowhide measure of land, and its fruit is exceedingly great. ८

सवृषं गोसहस्रं च यत्र तिष्ठत्यतन्द्रितम् बालवत्सप्रसूतानां तद् गोचर्म इतिस्मृतम् ९
The extent of land upon which a thousand cows together with a bull can stand freely, including cows that have given birth to calves, is known as a go-carma, or cowhide measure. ९

विप्राय दद्याच्च गुणान्विताय तपोवियुक्ताय जितेन्द्रियाय यावन्मही तिष्ठति सागरान्ता तावत् फलं तस्य भवेदनन्तम् १०
Whoever gives such land to a Brāhmaṇa endowed with virtues, devoted to austerity, and master of his senses, receives an endless reward for as long as the earth bounded by the oceans endures. १०

यथा वीजानि रोहन्ति प्रकीर्णानि महीतले एवं कामाः प्ररोहन्ति भूमिदानसमार्जिताः ११
Just as seeds scattered upon the earth sprout and grow, so do the desires acquired through the gift of land sprout and flourish. ११



--- Page 2 ---

यथाप्सु पतितः सद्य स्तैलविन्दुः प्रसर्पति एवं भूमिकृतं दानं सश्ये सश्ये प्ररोहति १२
Just as a drop of oil immediately spreads when it falls upon water, so does a gift of land grow from crop to crop. १२

अन्नदाः सुखिनो नित्यं वस्त्रदश्चैव रूपवान् १३
Those who give food are always happy, and those who give clothing become handsome. १३

स नरः सर्वदो भूप यो ददाति वसुन्धराम् यथा गौर्भरते वत्सं क्षारमुत्सृज्य क्षीरिणी १४
O King, the man who gives the earth becomes a giver of all things, just as a milk-giving cow nourishes her calf after releasing the saline substance and giving milk. १४

एवं दत्ता सहस्राक्ष भूमिर्भरति भूमिदम् शङ्ख भद्रासनं छत्रं चरस्थावरवारणाः १५
Thus, O thousand-eyed Indra, the earth, when given away, sustains the giver of land; conch shells, auspicious seats, umbrellas, and movable and immovable elephants are [among the rewards]. १५

भूमिदानस्य पुण्यानि फलं स्वर्गः पुरन्दर आदित्यो वरुणो वह्निर्ब्रह्मा सोमो हुताशनः १६
The merit of giving land is heaven; Purandara, Āditya, Varuṇa, Agni, Brahmā, Soma, and Hutāśana [are pleased by it]. १६

शूलपाणिश्च भगवानभिनन्दति भूमिदम् आस्फोटयन्ति पितरः प्रहर्षन्ति पितामहाः १७
The blessed Śūlapāṇi rejoices in the giver of land; the ancestors applaud, and the grandfathers rejoice. १७

भूमिदाता कुले जातः स नस्त्राता भविष्यति त्रीण्याहुरति दानानि गावः पृथ्वी सरस्वती १८
One born in the lineage of a giver of land will become its savior; three gifts are said to be supreme: cows, the earth, and Sarasvatī. १८

तारयन्ति हि दातारं सर्वात्पापादसंशयम् प्रावृता वस्त्रदा यान्ति नग्ना यान्ति त्ववस्त्रदाः १९
They undoubtedly deliver their givers from all sins; those who give clothing go clothed, while those who do not give clothing go naked. १९

तृप्ता यान्त्यग्निदातारः क्षुधिता यान्त्यनन्नदाः कांक्षन्ति पितरः सर्वे नरकाद्भयभीरवः २०
Those who give fire go satisfied; those who do not give food go hungry. All the ancestors, terrified of hell, yearn [for offerings]. २०

गयां यो यास्यति पुत्रः स नस्त्राता भविष्यति एष्टव्या बहवः पुत्राः यद्येकोऽपि गयां व्रजेत् २१
The son who goes to Gayā will become a savior; therefore, one should desire many sons, even if only one of them goes to Gayā. २१

यजेत वाश्वमेधेन नीलं वा वृषमुत्सृजेत् लोहितो यस्तु वर्णेन पुच्छाग्रे यस्तु पाण्डरः २२
One should perform the Aśvamedha sacrifice or release a bull that is blue, red in color, and white at the tip of its tail. २२

श्वेतः खुरविषाणाभ्यां स नीलो वृष उच्यते नीलः पाण्डरलाङ्खलस्तृणमुद्धरते तु यः २३
He is called a blue bull when his hooves and horns are white; the bull that is blue with a white tail and uproots grass is [also described]. २३

षष्टिवर्षसहस्राणि पितरस्तेन तर्पिताः यच्च शृङ्गगतम्पङ्गं कूलस्तिष्ठति चोद्धतम् २४
By him, the ancestors are satisfied for sixty thousand years; and whatever mud reaches the horns and is lifted up while standing on the bank [also bears merit]. २४

पितरस्तस्य नश्यन्ति सोमलोकं महाद्युतिम् पृथोर्यदोर्दिलीपस्य नृगस्य नहुषस्य च २५
His ancestors attain the radiant world of Soma, [as did the ancestors] of Pṛthu, Yadu, Dilīpa, Nṛga, and Nahuṣa. २५

--- Page 3 ---

अन्येषाञ्च नरेन्द्राणां पुनरन्या भविष्यति बहुभिर्वसुधा दत्ता राजभिः सगरादिभिः २६
And it will belong to other kings in turn; the earth has been given away by many kings, beginning with Sagara and others. २६

यस्य यस्य यदा भूमिस्तस्य तस्य तदा फलम् यस्तु ब्रह्मघ्नः स्त्रीघ्नो वा यस्तु वै पितृघातकः २७
Whoever possesses the earth at any given time receives the corresponding fruit of it. But one who kills a Brāhmaṇa, one who kills a woman, or one who kills his father... २७

गवां शतसहस्राणां हन्ता भवति दुष्कृती स्वदत्तां परदत्तां वा यो हरेच्च वसुन्धराम् २८
The wicked person who takes away the earth that he himself has given, or that has been given by another, becomes as sinful as the killer of a hundred thousand cows. २८

श्वविष्ठायां क्रिमिर्भूत्वा पितृभिः सह पच्यते आक्षेप्ता चानुमन्ता च तमेव नरकं व्रजेत् २९
He becomes a worm in the excrement of dogs and suffers there together with his ancestors. The one who causes such an act and the one who consents to it both go to that very hell. २९

भूमिदो भूमिहर्त्ता च नापरं पुण्यपापयोः ऊर्ध्वाधो वाऽवतिष्ठेत यावदाभूतसंप्लवम् ३०
The giver of land and the taker of land share no equal measure of merit and sin; they remain in higher or lower states until the dissolution of the world. ३०

अग्नेरपत्यं प्रथमं हिरण्यं भूर्वैष्णवी सूर्यसुताश्च गावः लोकास्त्रयस्तेन भवन्ति दत्ता यः काञ्चनं गाञ्च महीञ्च दद्यात् ३१
Gold is said to be the first offspring of Agni, the earth is of Viṣṇu, and cows are the daughters of the Sun. One who gives gold, a cow, and land thereby attains the three worlds. ३१

षडशीति सहस्राणां योजनानां वसुन्धराम् स्वतो दत्ता तु सर्वत्र सर्वकामप्रदायिनी ३२
The earth, extending over eighty-six thousand yojanas, when given away by oneself, becomes the bestower of all desired objects everywhere. ३२

भूमिं यः प्रतिगृह्णाति भूमिं यश्च प्रयच्छति उभौ तौ पुण्यकर्माणौ नियतं स्वर्गगामिनौ ३३
The one who accepts land and the one who gives land are both performers of meritorious deeds and are surely destined to attain heaven. ३३

सर्वेषामेव दानानां एकजन्मानुगं फलम् हाटकक्षितिगौरीणां सप्तजन्मानुगं फलम् ३४
The fruit of all other gifts follows a person for one lifetime; but the fruit of gifts of gold, land, and cows follows for seven births. ३४

यो न हिंस्यादहं ह्यात्मा भूतग्रामं चतुर्विधम् तस्य देहाद्वियुक्तस्य भयं नास्ति कदाचन ३५
One who does not harm the fourfold multitude of living beings, regarding them as his own Self, has no fear whatsoever after departing from the body. ३५

अन्यायेन हृता भूमिर्यै नरैरपहारिता हरन्तो हारयन्तश्च हन्युस्ते सप्तमङ्गुलम् ३६
Those men who unjustly seize and take away land, and those who cause others to take it away, destroy their own lineage up to the seventh generation. ३६

हरते हरयेद्यस्तु मन्दबुद्धिस्ततो वृतः स बध्यो वारुणैः पाशैस्तिर्यग्योनिषु जायते ३७
Whoever, being deluded by foolishness, steals land or causes it to be stolen is bound by the nooses of Varuṇa and is born among the lower forms of life. ३७

अश्रुभिः पतितैस्तेषां दानानामपकीर्त्तनम् ब्राह्मणस्य हृते क्षेत्रे हृतं त्रिपुरुषं कुलम् ३८
The tears shed by those deprived of such gifts become a cause of their condemnation; when a field belonging to a Brāhmaṇa is taken away, three generations of the family are destroyed. ३८

--- Page 4 ---

वापीकूपसहस्त्रेण अश्वमेधशतेन च गवां कोटिप्रदानेन भूमिहर्त्ता न शुध्यति ३९
Even by constructing a thousand wells and reservoirs, performing a hundred Aśvamedha sacrifices, or donating ten million cows, one who has seized another’s land is not purified. ३९

गोमेकां स्वर्णमेकं वा भूमेरप्यर्द्धमङ्गुलम् रुन्धन्नरकमायाति यावदाभूतसंप्लवम् हुतं दत्तं तपोऽधीतं यत्किञ्चिद्धर्मसञ्चितम् ४०
One who obstructs even the passage of a single cow, a piece of gold, or even half an aṅgula of land goes to hell for as long as the dissolution of the universe lasts; whatever has been offered into the fire, donated, performed as austerity, studied, or accumulated as religious merit is destroyed. ४०

अर्द्धाङ्गुलस्य सीमाया हरणेन प्रणश्यति गोवीथीं ग्रामरथ्याञ्च श्मशानं गोपितं तथा ४१
By taking away even half an aṅgula of a boundary, all merit is destroyed; likewise, one must not obstruct a cattle-path, a village road, or a protected cremation ground. ४१

सम्पीड्य नरकं याति यावदाभूतसंप्लवम् ऊषरे निर्जले स्थाने प्रस्तं शस्यं विसजयेत् ४२
One who obstructs these goes to hell for as long as the dissolution of the universe lasts; in a barren and waterless place, one should distribute and establish grain. ४२

जलाधारश्च कर्तव्यो व्यासस्य वचनं यथा पञ्च कन्यानृते हन्ति दश हन्ति गवानृते ४३
A reservoir of water should also be constructed, according to the teaching of Vyāsa. A lie concerning five maidens destroys fivefold merit, while a lie concerning ten cows destroys tenfold merit. ४३

शतमश्वानृते हन्ति सहस्रं पुरुषानृते हन्ति जाता न जातांश्च हिरण्यार्थेऽनृतं वदेत् ४४
A falsehood concerning a hundred horses destroys a hundredfold merit, and one concerning a thousand men destroys a thousandfold merit; for the sake of obtaining gold, one should not speak falsely concerning those who are born or unborn. ४४

सर्वं भूम्यनृते हन्ति मा स्म भूम्यनृतं वदीः ह्मस्वे मा रतिं कुर्याः प्राणैः कण्ठगतैरपि ४५
A falsehood concerning land destroys all merit; therefore, never speak falsely regarding land. Do not take pleasure even in a minor falsehood, even when your life is at stake. ४५

अनौषधमभेषज्यं विषमेतद्धलाहलम् न विषं विषमित्याहुः ब्रह्मस्वं विषमुच्यते ४६
That which is not medicine and cannot serve as a remedy is poison, indeed a deadly poison. Yet this is not regarded as the greatest poison; the property of a Brāhmaṇa is said to be poison. ४६

विषमेकाकिनं हन्ति ब्रह्मस्वं पुत्रपौत्रकम् लोहखण्डाश्मचूर्णं च विषञ्च ज्वरयेन्नरम् ४७
Ordinary poison kills one person, whereas misappropriation of a Brāhmaṇa’s property destroys sons and grandsons; even a piece of iron, powdered stone, and poison can afflict a person with fever. ४७

ब्रह्मस्वं त्रिषु लोकेषु कः पुमान् ज्वरयिष्यति मन्युप्रहरणा विप्रा राजानः शस्त्रपाणयः ४८
Who in the three worlds can withstand the danger of misappropriating a Brāhmaṇa’s property? Brāhmaṇas wield anger as their weapon, while kings wield weapons in their hands. ४८

शस्त्रमेकाकिनं हन्ति विप्रमन्युः कुलक्षयम् शस्त्रमेकाकिनं हन्ति विप्रमन्युः कुलक्षयम् मन्युप्रहरणा विप्रा श्चक्रप्रहरणो हरिः ४९
A weapon kills a single person, but the anger of a Brāhmaṇa destroys an entire lineage. A weapon kills a single person, but the anger of a Brāhmaṇa destroys an entire lineage. Brāhmaṇas wield anger as their weapon, while Hari wields the discus as his weapon. ४९

चक्रात्तीव्रतरो मन्युस्तस्माद्विप्रं न कोपयेत् अग्निदग्धाः प्ररोहन्ति सूर्यदग्धास्तथैव च ५०
Anger is more powerful than the discus; therefore, one should never anger a Brāhmaṇa. Those scorched by fire may sprout again, and likewise those scorched by the sun may recover. ५०

--- Page 5 ---

मन्युदग्धस्य विप्राणामङ्कुरो न प्ररोहति अग्निर्दहति तेजसा सूर्यो दहति रश्मिभिः ५१
The seed of those Brāhmaṇas who are scorched by anger does not sprout. Fire burns through its heat, and the Sun burns through its rays. ५१

राजा दहति दण्डेन विप्रो दहति मन्युना ब्रह्मस्वेन तु यत् सौख्यं देवस्वेन तु या रतिः ५२
A king burns through punishment, and a Brāhmaṇa burns through anger. Whatever happiness arises from the wealth of a Brāhmaṇa, and whatever pleasure arises from the wealth of the gods— ५२

तद्धनं कुलनाशाय भवत्यात्मविनाशकम् ब्रह्मस्वं ब्रह्महत्या च दरिद्रस्य च यद्धनम् ५३
That wealth becomes the cause of the destruction of the family and the destroyer of oneself. The wealth belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, the sin of killing a Brāhmaṇa, and the wealth of a poor person— ५३

गुरुमित्रहिरण्यञ्च स्वर्गस्थमपि पीडयेत् ब्रह्मस्वेन तु यच्छिद्रं तच्छिद्रं न प्ररोहति ५४
Even the gold belonging to a teacher or a friend, though one may be established in heaven, can cause harm. A breach caused by taking the wealth of a Brāhmaṇa never sprouts again. ५४

प्रच्छादयति तच्छिद्रमन्यत्र तु विसर्पति ब्रह्मस्वेन तु पुष्टानि साधनानि बलानि च ५५
It conceals that breach, but elsewhere it spreads. The resources and powers that have been strengthened through the wealth of a Brāhmaṇa— ५५

संग्रामे तानि लीयन्ते सिकतासु यथोदकम् श्रोत्रियाय कुलीनाय दरिद्राय च वासव ५६
—those disappear in battle just as water disappears into sand. O Vāsava, to a learned Brāhmaṇa, to one of noble lineage, and to a poor person— ५६

सन्तुष्टाय विनीताय सर्वभूताहिताय च वेदाभ्यासस्तपो ज्ञानमिन्द्रियाणां च संयमः ५७
—to one who is content, humble, and devoted to the welfare of all beings, who practices the Vedas, performs austerity, possesses knowledge, and exercises control over the senses— ५७

ईदृशाय सुरश्रेष्ठ यदत्तं हि तदक्षयम् आमपात्रे यथान्यस्तं क्षीरं दधि घृतं मधु ५८
O best of the gods, whatever is given to such a person becomes imperishable. Just as milk, curd, ghee, and honey placed in an unbaked vessel— ५८

विनश्येत्पात्रदौर्बल्यात्तच्च पात्रं विनश्यति एवं गाञ्च हिरण्यञ्च वस्त्रमन्नं महीं तिलान् ५९
—perish because of the weakness of the vessel, and that vessel itself is destroyed, so too cows, gold, clothing, food, land, and sesame seeds— ५९

अविद्वान् प्रतिगृह्णाति भस्मीभवति काष्ठवत् यस्य चैव गृहे मूर्खी दूरे चापि बहुश्रुतः ६०
If an unlearned person accepts these gifts, he is reduced to ashes like wood. When a fool is in one's household, while a highly learned person is far away— ६०

बहुश्रुताय दातव्यं नास्ति मूर्खे व्यतिक्रमः कुलं तारयते धीरः सप्त सप्त च वासव ६१
—the gift should be given to the highly learned one; there should be no exception in favor of the fool. O Vāsava, the wise man delivers seven generations of his family, and seven generations beyond them. ६१

यस्तडाकं नवं कुर्य्यात् पुराणं वाऽपि खानयेत् स सर्वं कुलमुद्धत्य स्वर्गे लोके महीयते ६२
Whoever constructs a new reservoir or excavates an old one, having uplifted his entire lineage, is honored in the heavenly world. ६२

वापीकूपतडागानि उद्यानोपवनानि च पुनः संस्कारकर्त्ता च लभते मौलिकं फलम् ६३
Whoever restores stepwells, wells, reservoirs, gardens, or pleasure-groves receives the original merit of their creation. ६३

--- Page 6 ---

निदाघकाले पानीयं यस्य तिष्ठति वासव स दुर्गं विषमं कृत्स्त्रं न कदाचिदवाप्नुयात् ६४
O Vāsava, he in whose place drinking water remains available during the heat of summer never encounters any difficult or adverse circumstance. ६४

एकाहं तु स्थितं तोयं पृथिव्यां राजसत्तम कुलानि तारयेत्तस्य सप्त सप्त पराण्यपि ६५
O best of kings, water that remains available on the earth for even a single day saves seven generations of his own family and seven generations beyond them. ६५

दीपालोकप्रदानेन वपुष्मान् स भवेन्नरः प्रोक्षणीयप्रदानेन स्मृतिं मेधाञ्च विन्दति ६६
By donating a lamp for illumination, a person becomes endowed with a radiant body; by providing water for ritual sprinkling, he obtains memory and intelligence. ६६

कृत्वाऽपि पापकर्माणि यो दद्यादन्नमर्थिने ब्राह्मणाय विशेषेण न स पापेन लिप्यते ६७
Even after committing sinful acts, one who gives food to a person in need, especially to a Brāhmaṇa, is not tainted by sin. ६७

भूमिर्गाव स्तथा दाराः प्रसह्य ह्रियते यदा नचाऽऽवेदयते यस्तु तमाहुर्ब्रह्मघातकम् ६८
When land, cows, or wives are forcibly taken away, one who does not report the matter is called a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa. ६८

निवेदितस्तु राजा वै ब्राह्मणैर्मन्युपीडितैः तं न तारयते यस्तु तमाहुर्ब्रह्मघातकम् ६९
When the matter is reported to the king by distressed Brāhmaṇas, the one who does not rescue them is likewise called a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa. ६९

उपस्थिते विवाहे च यज्ञे दाने च वासव मोहाच्चरति विघ्नं यः स मृतो जायते क्रिमिः ७०
O Vāsava, when a marriage, sacrifice, or charitable gift is taking place, whoever obstructs it through delusion is born as a worm after death. ७०

धनं फलति दानेन जीवितं जीवरक्षणात् रूपमैश्वर्यमारोग्यमहिंसाफलमश्नुते ७१
Wealth bears fruit through charity; life bears fruit through protecting life; and beauty, prosperity, and health are attained as the fruits of non-violence. ७१

फलमूलाशनात् पूज्यं स्वर्गं सत्येन लभ्यते प्रायोपवेशनाद्राज्यं सर्वत्र सुखमश्नुते ७२
By living on fruits and roots, one attains an honored place in heaven; through truthfulness, one attains heaven; through fasting unto death, one attains sovereignty and enjoys happiness everywhere. ७२

गवाढयःशक्रदीक्षायाः स्वर्गगामी तृणाशनः स्त्रिय स्त्रिषवणस्त्रायी वायुं पीत्वा क्रतुं लभेत् ७३
One who possesses many cows attains the merit of Indra's consecration; one who lives on grass goes to heaven; a woman who bathes three times a day becomes sanctified; and one who lives on air attains the merit of a sacrifice. ७३

नित्यस्त्रायी भवेदर्कः सन्ध्ये द्वे च जपन् द्विजः न तत्साधयते राज्यं नाकपृष्ठमनाशके ७४
The Sun is ever bathing in light; a twice-born who recites prayers at the two Sandhyās attains the heavenly realm and sovereignty that cannot be destroyed. ७४

अग्निप्रवेशे नियतं ब्रह्मलोके महीयते रत्नानां प्रतिसंहारे पशून् पुत्रांश्च विन्दति ७५
One who deliberately enters fire is honored in Brahmaloka; by withdrawing from the enjoyment of precious jewels, one obtains cattle and sons. ७५

नाके चिरं स वसते उपवासी च यो भवेत् सततं चैकशायी यः स लभेदीप्सिताङ्गतिम् ७६
He who remains fasting dwells for a long time in heaven; and he who constantly sleeps alone attains the desired destination. ७६

वीरासनम् वीरशय्यां वीरस्थानमुपाश्रितः अक्षय्यास्तस्य लोकाः स्युः सर्वकामगमास्तथा ७७
He who adopts the heroic posture, the heroic bed, or the abode of heroes obtains imperishable worlds where all desires are fulfilled. ७७

उपवासञ्च दीक्षाञ्च अभिषेकञ्च वासव कृत्वा द्वादशवर्षाणि वीरस्थानाद्विशिष्यते ७८
O Vāsava, one who undertakes fasting, consecration, and ceremonial initiation for twelve years becomes distinguished by attaining the abode of heroes. ७८

अधीत्य सर्ववेदान् वै सद्यो दुःखात् प्रमुच्यते ७९
Having studied all the Vedas, one is immediately freed from suffering. ७९

पावनं चरते धर्मं स्वर्गे लोके महीयते ८०
He who practices the purifying Dharma is honored in the heavenly world. ८०

बृहस्पति मतं पुण्यं ये पठन्ति द्विजातयः चत्वारि तेषां वर्धन्ते आयुर्विद्या यशो बलम् ८१
Those twice-born who study this sacred teaching of Bṛhaspati have four things increased: lifespan, knowledge, fame, and strength. ८१

इति बृहस्पतिप्रणीतं धर्मशास्त्रं सम्पूर्णम् समाप्ताचेयं बृहस्पतिस्मृतिः
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra composed by Bṛhaspati; thus is the Bṛhaspati Smṛti completed.
