--- Page 1 ---
दक्षस्मृतिः 
प्रथमोऽध्यायः 
श्रीगणेशाय नमः 

अथादौ आश्रमवर्णनम् ।
Now, first, the description of the four āśramas.

सर्वधर्मार्थतत्त्वज्ञ सर्ववेदविदां वरः पारगः सर्व्वविद्यानां दक्षो नाम प्रजापतिः १
Dakṣa, the Prajāpati, was a knower of the essence of all dharma and artha, foremost among those learned in all the Vedas, an adept in all branches of knowledge. १

उत्पत्तिः प्रलयश्चैव स्थितिः संहार एव च आत्मा चात्मनि तिष्ठेत आत्मा ब्रह्मण्यवस्थितः २
Creation, dissolution, preservation, and destruction—all these exist within the Self; the Self abides in the Self, and the Self is established in Brahman. २

ब्रह्मचारी गृहस्थश्च वानप्रस्थो यतिस्तथा एतेषान्तु हितार्थाय दक्षः शास्त्रमकल्पयत् ३
Brahmacarya, the household life, the forest-dwelling life, and the life of a renunciant—Dakṣa established this scripture for the welfare of those following these four āśramas. ३

जातमात्रः शिशुस्तावद्यावदष्टौ समा वयः सहि गर्भसमो ज्ञेयो व्यक्तिमात्रप्रदर्शितः ४
A child is regarded as newly born until the age of eight years; until then, he is to be regarded as equivalent to one still in the womb, merely manifesting as an individual being. ४

भक्ष्याभक्ष्ये तथा पेये वाच्यावाच्ये तथानृते तस्मिन् काले न दोषोऽस्ति स यावन्नोपनीयते ५
Regarding what may or may not be eaten, what may or may not be drunk, what may or may not be spoken, and even falsehood, there is no fault during that period, until he undergoes the upanayana ceremony. ५

उपनीतस्य दोषोऽस्ति क्रियमाणैर्विगर्हितैः अप्राप्तव्यवहारोऽसौ यावत् षोडशवार्षिकः ६
After upanayana, there is fault in performing prohibited acts; however, until he reaches sixteen years of age, he is not yet regarded as having attained full social responsibility. ६

स्वीकरोति यदा वेदं चरेद्वेदव्रतानि च ब्रह्मचारी भवेत्तावदूर्ध्वं स्त्रातो भवेद्गही ७
When he undertakes the study of the Veda and observes the vows of Vedic study, he is a brahmacārin; thereafter, upon completing his study and ritual bath, he becomes a householder. ७

द्विविधो ब्रह्मचारी तु स्मृतः शास्त्रे मनीषिभिः उपकुर्वाणकस्त्वाद्यो द्वितीयो नैष्ठिकः स्मृतः ८
The wise have declared two kinds of brahmacārins in the scriptures: the first is the Upakurvāṇaka, and the second is known as the Naiṣṭhika. ८

यो गृहाश्रममास्थाय ब्रह्मचारी भवेत् पुनः न यतिर्न वनस्थश्च सर्वाश्रमविवर्जितः ९
One who enters the household āśrama and then again becomes a brahmacārin is neither a renunciant nor a forest-dweller; rather, he is excluded from all the āśramas. ९

अनाश्रमी न तिष्ठेत्तु दिनमेकमपि द्विजः आश्रमेण विना तिष्ठन् प्रायश्चित्तीयते हि सः १०
A twice-born person should not remain without an āśrama even for a single day; one who lives without an āśrama must undergo expiation. १०

जपे होमे तथा दाने स्वाध्याये च रतस्तु यः नासौ तत्फलमाप्नोति कुर्वाणोऽप्याश्रमाच्चयुतः त्रयाणामानुलोम्यं हि प्रातिलोम्यं न विद्यते ११
One who is devoted to japa, homa, charity, and self-study does not obtain their fruits if he performs them after falling away from his āśrama. For the three āśramas, the order is anu­lomya; there is no pratilomya progression. ११

प्रातिलोम्येन यो याति न तस्मात् पापकृत्तमः मेखलाजिनदण्डेन ब्रह्मचारी तु लक्ष्यते १२
One who proceeds in the reverse order commits no greater sin than this. A brahmacārin is recognized by the girdle, the deerskin, and the staff. १२

गृहस्थो देवयज्ञाद्यैर्नखलोम्ना वनाश्रितः त्रिदण्डेन यतिश्चैव लक्षणानि पृथक्पृथक् १३
A householder is characterized by the performance of sacrifices to the gods and similar duties; one dwelling in the forest is characterized by uncut nails and hair; and a renunciant by the triple staff. Thus, their distinguishing marks are separate. १३

यस्यैतल्लक्षणं नास्ति प्रायश्चित्ती नचाश्रमी उक्त कर्म क्रमोनोक्तो न कालो मुनिभिः स्मृतः द्विजानान्तु हितार्थाय दक्षस्तु स्वयमब्रवीत् १४
One who does not possess these distinguishing marks is subject to expiation and is not regarded as belonging to an āśrama. The sages have not stated the prescribed order of duties or the proper times; Dakṣa himself declared these rules for the welfare of the twice-born. १४

इति दाक्षे धर्मशास्त्रे प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the first chapter of the Dākṣa Dharmaśāstra.
 

--- Page 2 ---

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
here, 2nd chapter 

प्रातरुत्थाय कर्त्तव्यं यद्विजेन दिने दिने तत्सर्वं संप्रवक्ष्यामि द्विजानामुपकारकम् १
I shall now fully describe all that a twice-born person should do every day after rising in the morning, for the benefit of the twice-born. १

उदयास्तमयं यावन्न विप्रः क्षणिकोभवेत् नित्यनैमित्तिकैर्मुक्तः काम्यैश्चान्यैरगर्हितैः २
From sunrise until sunset, a Brāhmaṇa should not remain idle even for a moment, being engaged in the obligatory and occasional duties, as well as in other permissible acts. २

यः स्वकर्म परित्यज्य यदन्यत्कुरुते द्विजः अज्ञानाद्यदि वा मोहात्स तेन पतितो भवेत् ३
If a twice-born person abandons his prescribed duty and performs something else, whether through ignorance or delusion, he thereby becomes fallen. ३

दिवसस्याद्यभागे तु कृत्यं तस्योपदिश्यते द्वितीये च तृतीये च चतुर्थे पञ्चमे तथा ४
His duties are prescribed for the first part of the day, and likewise for the second, third, fourth, and fifth parts. ४

षष्ठे च सप्तमे चैव अष्टमे च पृथक् पृथक् विभागेष्वेषु यत्कर्म तत्प्रवक्ष्याम्यशेषतः ५
Likewise, for the sixth, seventh, and eighth parts, I shall describe completely the duties prescribed separately for each of these divisions. ५

उषःकाले तु सम्प्राप्ते शौचं कृत्वा यथार्थवत् ततः स्नानं प्रकुर्वीत दन्तधावनपूर्वकम् ६
When dawn arrives, having properly performed the cleansing rites, he should then bathe, beginning with the cleansing of the teeth. ६

अत्यन्तमलिनः कायो नवच्छिद्रसमन्वितः स्रवत्येष दिवारात्रौ प्रातःस्त्रानं विशोधनम् ७
The body is extremely impure and is endowed with nine openings, through which discharges continually flow day and night; therefore, the morning bath is a means of purification. ७

क्लिद्यन्ति हि प्रसुप्तस्य इन्द्रियाणि स्रवन्ति च अङ्गानि समतां यान्ति उत्तमान्यधमैः सह ८
Indeed, while a person sleeps, his senses become soiled and his limbs discharge impurities; the superior and inferior parts alike become affected. ८


--- Page 3 ---

नानास्वेदसमाकीर्णः शयनादुत्थितः पुमान् अन्नात्वा नाचरेत्कर्म जपहोमादि किञ्चन ९
A person rising from sleep, covered with various kinds of sweat, should not perform any act such as japa, homa, or other religious duties without first bathing. ९

प्रातरुत्थाय यो विप्रः प्रातस्त्रायी भवेत् सदा समस्तजन्मजं पापं त्रिभिर्वर्षैर्व्यपोहति १०
The Brāhmaṇa who rises in the morning and regularly performs the morning bath destroys, within three years, all the sins accumulated from his births. १०

उषस्युषसि यत्स्त्रानं सन्ध्यायामुदिते रवौ प्राजापत्येन तत्तुल्यं महापातकनाशनम् ११
The bath performed at dawn, during the Sandhyā, when the sun has risen, is equal to the Prājāpatya expiation and destroys even the great sins. ११

प्रातःस्त्रानं प्रशंसन्ति दृष्टादृष्टकरं हि तत् सर्वमर्हति पूतात्मा प्रातःस्त्रायी जपादिकम् १२
The morning bath is highly praised, for it bestows both visible and unseen benefits. Having purified himself through the morning bath, a person becomes fit for all practices such as japa and the like. १२

स्नानादनन्तरं तावदुपस्पर्शनमुच्यते अनेन तु विधानेन आचान्तः शुचिता मियात् १३
After bathing, the rite of touching and sipping water is prescribed; by performing it according to this procedure, one who has performed ācamana attains purity. १३

प्रक्षाल्य पादौ हस्तौ च त्रिः पिवेदम्बु वीक्षितम् संवृत्याङ्गुष्ठमूलेन द्विः प्रमृज्यात्ततोमुखम् १४
Having washed the feet and hands, he should three times sip water that has been properly observed and purified; then, covering the mouth with the base of the thumb, he should wipe it twice. १४

संहत्य तिसृभिः पूर्वमास्यमेवमुपस्पृशेत् ततः पादौ समभ्युक्ष्य अङ्गानि समुपस्पृशेत् १५
Having brought the three fingers together, he should first touch the mouth in this manner; then, after sprinkling the feet, he should touch the various limbs. १५

अङ्गुष्ठेन प्रदेशिन्या घ्राणं पश्चादनन्तरम् अङ्गुष्ठानामिकाभ्याञ्च चक्षुः श्रोत्रे पुनः पुनः १६
With the thumb and index finger he should touch the nose; thereafter, with the thumb and ring finger, he should touch the eyes and ears repeatedly. १६

कनिष्ठाङ्गुष्ठया नाभिं हृदयञ्च तलेन वै सर्वाभिस्तु शिरः पश्चाद्वाहू चाग्रेण संस्पृशेत् १७
With the little finger and thumb he should touch the navel and the heart with the palm; with all the fingers he should then touch the head, and afterward touch the arms with their fingertips. १७

सन्ध्यायाञ्च प्रभाते च मध्याह्ने च ततः पुनः सन्ध्यां नोपासते यस्तु ब्राह्मणो हि विशेषतः १८
At dawn, at midday, and again at the evening Sandhyā, a Brāhmaṇa in particular should perform the Sandhyā worship; one who does not observe it incurs grave fault. १८

स जीवन्नेव शूद्रः स्यान्मृतः श्वा चैव जायते सन्ध्याहीनोऽशुचिर्नित्यमनर्हः सर्वकर्मसु १९
One who neglects the Sandhyā is regarded as a Śūdra even while alive, and after death is said to be born as a dog; being devoid of Sandhyā, he is perpetually impure and unfit for all religious acts. १९

यदन्यत्कुरुते कर्म न तस्य फलमश्नुते सन्ध्याकर्मावसाने तु स्वयं होमो विधीयते स्वयं होमे फलं यत्तु तदन्येन न जायते २०
Whatever other religious act he performs, he does not obtain its fruit. At the conclusion of the Sandhyā rite, the homa should be performed personally; the fruit obtained from performing the homa oneself cannot be obtained when it is performed by another. २०


--- Page 4 ---

ऋत्विक्पुत्रो गुरुर्भाता भागिनेयोऽथ विट्पतिः एभिरेव हुतं यत्तु तद्धतं स्वयमेव हि २१
The ṛtvij, his son, the guru, his brother, his sister’s son, or the husband of his daughter—whatever is offered by any of these is regarded as though offered by oneself. २१

देवकार्य्य ततः कृत्वा गुरुमङ्गलवीक्षणम् देवकार्य्याणि पूर्वाह्ने मनुष्याणाञ्च मध्यमे २२
Having performed the duties relating to the gods, one should then behold the auspicious presence of the guru; the duties for the gods should be performed in the forenoon, and those for human beings in the middle part of the day. २२

पितृणामपराले च कार्य्याण्येतानि यत्नतः पौर्वाह्णिकन्तु यत् कर्म यदि तत्सायमाचरेत् २३
The duties for the ancestors should be performed in the afternoon with care. If a duty prescribed for the forenoon is performed in the evening instead, २३

न तस्य फलमाप्नोति बन्ध्यास्त्रीमैथुनं यथा दिवसस्याद्यभागे तु सर्वमेतद्विधीयते २४
one does not obtain its fruit, just as intercourse with a barren woman bears no fruit. All these duties are prescribed for the first part of the day. २४

द्वितीये च तथाभागे वेदाभ्यासो विधीयते वेदाभ्यासो हि विप्राणां परमं तप उच्यते २५
In the second part of the day, the study of the Veda is prescribed. Indeed, the study of the Veda is declared to be the highest austerity for Brāhmaṇas. २५

ब्रह्मयज्ञः स विज्ञेयः षडङ्गसहितस्तु सः वेदस्वीकरणं पूर्वं विचारोऽभ्यसनं जपः २६
This should be understood as Brahma-yajña, accompanied by the six Vedāṅgas. It consists first of receiving the Veda, reflection upon it, repeated study, and recitation. २६

ततोदानञ्च शिष्येभ्यो वेदाभ्यासो हि पञ्चधा समित्पुष्पकुशादीनां स कालः समुदाहृतः २७
Then comes teaching it to the disciples. Thus, the study of the Veda is described as fivefold. This is also the time prescribed for offerings such as samit, flowers, kuśa grass, and the like. २७

तृतीये चैव भागे तु पोष्यवर्गार्थसाधनम् पिता माता गुरुर्भार्य्या प्रजादीनाः समाश्रिताः २८
In the third part of the day, one should attend to the needs of those who are dependent upon him. These include the father, mother, guru, wife, children, and others who depend upon him. २८

अभ्यागतोऽतिथिश्चान्यः पोष्यवर्ग उदाहृतः ज्ञातिर्बन्धुजनः क्षीणस्तथानाथः समाश्रितः २९
A guest who has arrived, and other such persons, are also included among those to be supported; likewise, a relative, a kinsman who has become destitute, and a dependent orphan are included. २९

अन्येऽप्यधनयुक्ताश्च पोष्यवर्ग उदाहृतः भरणं पोष्यवर्गस्य प्रशस्तं स्वर्गसाधनम् ३०
Others who are without means are also described as belonging to the group of dependents. Supporting such dependents is praised as a means of attaining heaven. ३०

नरकं पीडने चास्य तस्माद्यत्नेन तं भरेत् सार्वभौतिकमन्नाद्यं कर्त्तव्यन्तु विशेषतः ज्ञानवियः प्रदातव्यमन्यथा नरकं व्रजेत् ३१
Oppressing such dependents leads to hell; therefore, one should carefully provide for them. Food and other necessities should especially be provided to all beings; knowledge should also be imparted, for otherwise one goes to hell. ३१

स जीवति य एवैको बहुभिश्चोपजीव्यते जीवन्तो मृतकाश्चान्ये य आत्मम्भरयो नराः वह्वर्थे जीव्यते कश्चित्कुटम्बार्थे तथा परैः ३२
He truly lives who is the one upon whom many others depend for their livelihood. Other men who live only for themselves are as good as dead. Some live for the sake of many, some for the sake of their family, and others for the sake of those around them. ३२

--- Page 5 ---

आत्मार्थेऽन्यो न शक्नोति स्वोदरेणापि दुःखितः दीनानाथविशिष्टेभ्यो दातव्यं भूतिमिच्छता ३३
No one else is able to live merely for his own sake, being distressed even by the needs of his own belly. One who desires prosperity should give to the poor, the helpless, and the distinguished. ३३

अदत्तदाना जायन्ते परभाग्योपजीविनः यद्ददाति विशिष्टेभ्यो यजुहोति दिने दिने ३४
Those who do not give in charity are born dependent upon the fortunes of others. Whatever one gives to the worthy and whatever one offers in sacrifice day after day, ३४

तत्तु वित्तमहं मन्ये शेषं कस्यापि रक्षति चतुर्थे च तथा भागे स्त्रानार्थं मृदमाहरेत् ३५
that alone I regard as his wealth; he merely preserves the remainder for someone else. In the fourth part of the day, he should likewise collect earth for the purpose of bathing. ३५

तिलपुष्पकुशादीनि स्त्रानञ्चाकृत्रिमे जले नित्यं नैमित्तिकं काम्यं त्रिविधं स्नानमुच्यते ३६
Sesame, flowers, kuśa grass, and the like should be used, and one should bathe in natural water. Bathing is said to be of three kinds: daily, occasional, and voluntary. ३६

तेषां मध्ये तु यन्नित्यं तत्पुनर्भिद्यते त्रिधा मलापहरणं पश्चान्मन्त्रवत्तु जले स्मृतम् ३७
Among these, the daily bath is further divided into three kinds: the removal of bodily impurities, followed by bathing in water accompanied by mantras, as prescribed. ३७

सन्ध्यास्त्रानमुभाभ्याञ्च स्त्रानभेदाः प्रकीर्तिताः मार्जनं जलमध्ये तु प्राणायामो यतस्ततः ३८
Bathing at the two Sandhyās is also described as a distinct form of bathing. In the midst of the water, one performs mārjana, and thereafter prāṇāyāma. ३८

उपस्थानं ततः पश्चात्सावित्र्या जप उच्यते सविता देवता यस्या सुखमग्निस्त्रिधा स्थितः ३९
After that comes the upasthāna, followed by the recitation of the Sāvitrī. Savitṛ is its presiding deity, and Agni, in three forms, is said to be pleasantly established therein. ३९

विश्वमित्रऋषिश्छन्दो गायत्री सा विशिष्यते पञ्चमे च तथाभागे संविभागो यथार्हतः ४०
Viśvāmitra is its ṛṣi, and Gāyatrī is its meter; it is especially distinguished in this respect. In the fifth part of the day, one should distribute what is due according to one's capacity. ४०

पितृदेवमनुष्याणां कीटानाञ्चोपदिश्यते देवैश्चैव मनुष्यैश्च तिर्य्यग्भिश्चोपजीव्यते ४१
This is prescribed for the ancestors, gods, human beings, and even insects. The householder is supported by the gods, by human beings, and by animals. ४१

गृहस्थः प्रत्यहं यस्मात्तस्माज्जयेष्ठाश्रमी गृही त्रयाणामाश्रमाणान्तु गृहस्थो योनिरुच्यते ४२
Since the householder supports them every day, the householder is considered the foremost among the āśramas. The householder is called the source of the other three āśramas. ४२

तेनैव सीदमानेन सीदन्तीहेतरे त्रयः मूलप्राणो भवेत् स्कन्दः स्कान्दाच्छाखाः सपल्लवाः ४३
When the householder himself declines, the other three also decline. He is like the vital root, while the branches and their leaves arise from that root. ४३

मूलेनैव विनष्टेन सर्वमेतद्विनश्यति तस्मात्सर्वप्रयत्नेन रक्षितव्यो गृहाश्रमी ४४
When the root itself is destroyed, all of this is destroyed. Therefore, the householder should be protected with every possible effort. ४४

राज्ञा चान्यैस्त्रिभिः पूज्यो माननीयश्च सर्वदा गृहस्थोऽपि क्रियायुक्तो न गृहेण गृहाश्रमी ४५
The householder should always be honored and respected by the king and by the other three āśramas. A householder is one who is engaged in the prescribed duties; merely possessing a house does not make one a householder. ४५


--- Page 6 ---

न चैव पुत्रदारेण स्वकर्मपरिवर्जितः अस्त्रात्वा चाप्यहुत्वा चाजप्त्वाऽदत्त्वा च मानवः ४६
Nor does a person become a householder merely through having a son and wife while abandoning his prescribed duties. One who neither bathes, nor performs the fire-offering, nor recites the prescribed prayers, nor gives in charity, ४६

देवादीनामृणी भूत्वा नरकं प्रतिपद्यते एक एव हि भुङ्गेऽन्नमपरोऽन्नेन भुज्यते ४७
becomes indebted to the gods and others and proceeds to hell. One person alone eats the food, while another is sustained by that food. ४७

न भुज्यते स एवैको योभुङ्गेऽन्नं ससाक्षिणा विभागशीलो योनित्यं क्षमायुक्तोदयापरः ४८
He alone is not truly eating who consumes food without sharing it with others; one who habitually distributes food, endowed with forgiveness and compassion, is the true eater. ४८

देवतातिथिभक्तश्च गृहस्थः स तु धार्मिकः दया लज्जा क्षमा श्रद्धा प्रज्ञा योगः कृतज्ञता ४९
A householder devoted to the gods and to guests is truly righteous. Compassion, modesty, forgiveness, faith, wisdom, spiritual discipline, and gratitude— ४९

एते यस्य गुणाः सन्ति स गृही मुख्य उच्यते संविभागं ततः कृत्वा गृहस्थः शेषभुग्भवेत् ५०
one who possesses these qualities is called an excellent householder. After making the proper distribution, the householder should consume only what remains. ५०

भुक्त्वा तु सुखमास्थाय तदन्नं परिणामयेत् इतिहासपुराणाद्यैः षष्ठञ्च सप्तमं नयेत् ५१
Having eaten and settled comfortably, he should allow the food to digest, and should pass the sixth and seventh parts of the day in studying the Itihāsas, Purāṇas, and other such works. ५१

अष्टमे लोकयात्रा तु बहिः सन्ध्या ततः पुनः होमो भोजनकञ्चैव यच्चान्यद्गहकृत्यकम् ५२
In the eighth part, he should attend to worldly affairs outside; thereafter, he should perform the evening Sandhyā, followed by the homa, भोजन, and whatever other household duties are required. ५२

कृत्वा चैवं ततः पश्चात् स्वाध्यायं किञ्चिदाहरेत् प्रदोषपश्चिमौ यामौ वेदाभ्यासेन तौ नयेत् ५३
Having performed these duties, he should then undertake some svādhyāya. He should spend the two watches of the early night in the study of the Veda. ५३

यामद्वयं शयानो हि ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते नैमित्तिकानि काम्यानि निपतन्ति यथा यथा ५४
Having slept for two watches, he becomes fit for attaining Brahman. Occasional and desired duties arise according to their respective circumstances. ५४

तथा तथैव कार्य्याणि न कालस्तु विधीयते अस्मिन्नेव प्रयुञ्जानो ह्यस्मिन्नेव तु लीयते ५५
They should be performed accordingly; no fixed time is prescribed for them. By engaging oneself in this very discipline, one attains dissolution in the same. ५५

तस्मात्सर्वप्रयत्नेन कर्त्तव्यं सुखमिच्छता सर्वत्र मध्यमौ यामौ हुतशेषं हविश्च यत् भुञ्जानश्च शयानश्च ब्राह्मणो नावसीदति ५६
Therefore, one who desires happiness should perform these duties with every effort. During the middle two watches, and with whatever remains from the oblation, the Brāhmaṇa who eats and sleeps does not decline or suffer. ५६

इति दाक्षे धर्मशास्त्रे द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the second chapter of the Dharmaśāstra of Dakṣa.


--- Page 7 ---

अथ तृतीयोऽध्यायः गृहस्थाश्रमवर्णनम्
Chapter Three: Description of the Householder’s Stage of Life ( grihstha ashrama )

सुधा नवगृहस्थस्य शब्दयामि नवैव तु तथैव नव कर्माणि विकर्माणि तथा नव १
I shall describe the nine forms of proper conduct of a householder, and likewise nine proper actions and nine improper actions. १

प्रच्छन्नानि नवान्यानि प्रकाश्यानि तथा नव सफलानि नवान्यानि निष्फलानि नवैव तु २
There are nine things that should be kept concealed, nine that should be openly revealed, nine that bear fruit, and likewise nine that are fruitless. २

अदेयानि नवान्यानि वस्तुजातानि सर्वदा नवका नव निर्दिष्टा गृहस्थोन्नतिकारकाः ३
There are nine kinds of things that should never be given away; these nine are declared to be the means of a householder’s prosperity. ३

सुधावस्तूनि वक्ष्यामि विशिष्टे गृहमागते मनश्चक्षुर्मुखं वाचं सौम्यं दद्याच्चतुष्टयम् ४
I shall describe the wholesome things: when an honoured person comes to the house, one should offer four things—kindness of mind, a pleasant gaze, a welcoming face, and gentle speech. ४

अभ्युत्थानमिहागच्छ पृच्छालापप्रियान्वितः उपासनमनुव्रज्या कार्याण्येतानि यत्नतः ५
One should rise to greet the guest, invite him to come, inquire after him with affectionate conversation, offer him a seat, and accompany him when he departs; these should be done carefully. ५

ईषद्दानानि चान्यानि भूमिरापस्तृणानि च पादशौचं तथाभ्यङ्गमाश्रयः शयनन्तथा ६
One should also offer small gifts, as well as a place, water, grass, washing of the feet, oil for anointing, shelter, and a place to sleep. ६

किञ्चिच्चान्नं यथाशक्ति नास्यानश्नन् गृहे वसेत् मृज्जलं चार्थिने देयमेतान्यपि सदा गृहे ७
According to one’s ability, one should offer some food; one should not remain in the house while the one who has come is left unfed. Earth and water should also be given to the one who asks for them; these things should always be available in the house. ७

सन्ध्या स्त्रानं जपो होमः स्वाध्यायो देवतार्चनम् वैश्वदेवं तथातिथ्यमुद्धतञ्चापि शक्तितः ८
Sandhyā worship, bathing, recitation of sacred formulas, offering into the fire, Vedic study, worship of the deities, the Vaiśvadeva offering, hospitality to guests, and charity according to one’s ability—these are to be performed. ८

पितृदेवमनुष्याणां दीनानाथतपस्विनाम् मातापितृगुरूणाञ्च संविभागो यथार्हतः ९
One should duly share one’s resources with the ancestors, gods, human beings, the poor and helpless, ascetics, and with one’s mother, father, and teacher. ९

एतानि नव कर्माणि विकर्माणि तथा पुनः अनृतं पारदार्य्यञ्च तथाभक्ष्यस्य भक्षणम् १०
These are the nine proper actions; now the nine improper actions are also described: falsehood, adultery, and eating forbidden food. १०

अगम्यागमनापेयपानं स्तेयञ्च हिंसनम् अश्रौतकर्माचरणं मित्रधर्मवहिष्कृतम् ११
Going to an improper woman, drinking what should not be drunk, stealing, violence, performing acts contrary to the Śrauta rites, and conduct that violates the duties owed to friends—these are improper actions. ११

नवैतानि विकर्माणि तानि सर्वाणि वर्जयेत् आयुर्वित्तं गृहच्छिद्रं मन्त्रमैथुनभेषजम् १२
These nine are improper actions; all of them should be avoided. One should conceal one’s lifespan, wealth, defects within the household, sacred mantras, sexual relations, and medicines. १२


--- Page 8 ---

तपोदानावमानौ च नव गोप्यानि यत्नतः प्रायोग्यमृणशुद्धिश्च दानाध्ययनविक्रयाः १३
Penance, charity, dishonour, and the other matters likewise—these nine should be carefully kept secret; practical matters, repayment of debts, charity, study, and sales are among them. १३

कन्यादानं वृषोत्सर्गो रहः पापमकुत्सनम् प्रकाश्यानि नवैतानि गृहस्थाश्रमिणस्तथा १४
The giving of a daughter in marriage, the release of a bull, secret wrongdoing, and the non-condemnation of sin—these and the other nine matters are to be made known by a householder. १४

मातापित्रोर्गुरौ मित्रे विनीते चोपकारिणि दीनानाथविशिष्टेभ्यो दत्तन्तु सफलं भवेत् १५
Whatever is given to one’s mother and father, teacher, friend, a humble person, a benefactor, or the poor, helpless, and distinguished becomes fruitful. १५

धूर्ते वन्दिनि मन्दे च कुवैद्ये कितवे शठे चाटचारणचौरभ्यो दत्तं भवति निष्फलम् १६
Whatever is given to a rogue, flatterer, fool, incompetent physician, gambler, deceitful person, entertainer, actor, or thief becomes fruitless. १६

सामान्यं याचितं न्यास आधिर्दाराश्च तद्धनम् क्रमायातञ्च निक्षेपः सर्वस्वञ्चान्वये सति १७
Common property, borrowed property, entrusted deposits, pledged property, one’s wife and her property, wealth inherited according to lineage, deposited wealth, and the entire ancestral estate are to be regarded according to their respective circumstances. १७

आपत्स्वपि न देयानि नव वस्तूनि सर्वदा यो ददाति स मूढात्मा प्रायश्चित्तीयते नरः १८
Even in times of distress, nine kinds of things should never be given away. Whoever gives them away is a foolish person and becomes subject to expiation. १८

नवनवकवेत्तारमनुष्ठानपरं नरम् इह लोके परे च श्रीः स्वर्गस्थञ्च न मुञ्चति १९
Prosperity does not abandon a person who knows these ninefold principles and is devoted to their proper observance, either in this world or in the next, even when he dwells in heaven. १९

यथैवात्मा परस्तद्वद्दष्टव्यः सुखमिच्छता सुखदुःखानि तुल्यानि यथात्मनि तथा परे २०
One who desires happiness should regard others just as oneself; just as pleasure and pain are felt by oneself, so they are to be understood in others. २०

सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं यत्किञ्चित् क्रियते परे ततस्तत्तु पुनः पश्चात्सर्वमात्मनि जायते २१
Whatever happiness or suffering one causes to another eventually returns to oneself. २१

न क्लेशेन विना द्रव्यं द्रव्यहीने कुतः क्रिया क्रियाहीने न धर्मः स्याद्धर्महीने कुतः सुखम् २२
Wealth cannot be obtained without effort; without wealth, how can proper actions be performed? Without proper action there is no dharma, and without dharma, how can there be happiness? २२

सुखं वाञ्छन्ति सर्वे हि तच्च धर्मसमुद्भवम् तस्माद्धर्मः सदा कार्य्यः सर्ववर्णैः प्रयत्नतः २३
Everyone desires happiness, and happiness arises from dharma; therefore, all varṇas should diligently practice dharma at all times. २३

न्यायागतेन द्रव्येण कर्तव्यं पारलौकिकम् दानञ्च विधिना देयं काले पात्रे गुणान्विते २४
With wealth acquired righteously, one should perform acts for the welfare of the next world; charity should be given according to proper rules, at the proper time, to a worthy and virtuous recipient. २४

समद्विगुणसाहस्रमानन्त्यञ्च यथाक्रमम् दाने फलविशेषः स्याद्धिंसायां तावदेव तु २५
The fruits of charity are respectively equal, double, a thousandfold, and infinite according to the worthiness of the recipient; in the case of injury, the result is likewise determined accordingly. २५

सममब्राह्मणे दानं द्विगुणं ब्राह्मणब्रुवे सहस्रगुणमाचार्ये त्वनन्तं वेदपारगे २६
A gift given to a non-Brāhmaṇa bears an equal result; to one who merely calls himself a Brāhmaṇa, it bears a twofold result; to an Ācārya, a thousandfold result; and to one who has mastered the Vedas, an infinite result. २६

विधिहीने तथा पात्रे यो ददाति प्रतिग्रहम् न केवलं तद्विनश्येच्छेषमप्यस्य नश्यति २७
Whoever gives or accepts a gift contrary to the prescribed rule or gives it to an unworthy recipient loses not only that gift but also the remainder of his wealth. २७

व्यसनप्रतिकाराय कुटम्बार्थञ्च याचते एवमन्विष्य दातव्यमन्यथा न फलं भवेत् २८
When someone asks for wealth to remedy a misfortune or for the sake of supporting his family, one should investigate the matter and then give; otherwise, the gift bears no fruit. २८

मातापितृविहीनन्तु संस्कारोद्वहनादिभिः यः स्थापयति तस्येह पुण्यसंख्या न विद्यते ३०
Whoever supports a person bereft of mother and father by providing rites, marriage, and other necessary support—there is no measure of the merit he gains in this world. ३०

न तच्छेयोऽग्निहोत्रेण नाग्निष्टोमेन लभ्यते यच्छ्रेयः प्राप्यते पुंसा विप्रेण स्थापितेन तु ३१
The merit that a person gains by supporting a Brāhmaṇa cannot be obtained even through the Agnihotra or the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice. ३१

यद्यदिष्टतमं लोके यच्चापि दयितं गृहे तत्तद्गुणवते देयं तदेवाक्षयमिच्छता ३२
Whatever is most cherished in the world, and whatever is most beloved in one’s household, should be given to a virtuous person by one who desires an imperishable reward. ३२

इति दाक्षे धर्मशास्त्रे तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the third chapter of the Dākṣa Dharmaśāstra.


--- Page 9 ---

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Chapter Four

पत्नीमूलं गृहं पुंसां यदि च्छन्दोऽनुवर्तिनी गृहाश्रमसमं नास्ति यदि भार्य्या वशानुगा १
The wife is the foundation of a man’s household; if she follows his wishes, there is nothing equal to the householder’s stage of life when the wife is obedient. १

तया धर्मार्थकामानां त्रिवर्गफलमश्नुते प्राकाम्ये वर्त्तमाना तु स्नेहान्नतु निवारिता २
Through her, he obtains the fruits of the threefold aims of life—dharma, wealth, and desire; when she acts according to her own inclination, she should be guided with affection, not restrained harshly. २

अवश्या सा भवेत्पश्चाद्यथा व्याधिरुपेक्षितः अनुकूला नवाग्दुष्टा दक्षा साध्वी प्रियम्वदा ३
If she is neglected, she may later become difficult to control, just as a disease becomes troublesome when neglected. She should be agreeable, free from harsh speech, capable, virtuous, and pleasant in speech. ३

आत्मगुप्ता स्वामिभक्ता देवता सा न मानुषी ४
She who protects herself and is devoted to her husband is truly divine, not merely human. ४

अनुकूलकलत्रो यस्तस्य स्वर्ग इहैव हि प्रतिकूलकलत्रस्य नरको नात्र संशयः ५
For one who has an agreeable wife, heaven itself exists here; for one who has a contrary wife, it is hell—of this there is no doubt. ५

स्वर्गेऽपि दुर्लभं ह्येतदनुरागः परस्परम् रक्त एको विरक्तोऽन्यस्तस्मात् कष्टतरं नु किम् ६
Mutual affection such as this is difficult to obtain even in heaven. When one is attached and the other is indifferent, what could be more difficult than that? ६

गृहवासः सुखार्थाय पत्नीमूलं गृहे सुखम् सा पत्नी या विनीता स्याच्चितज्ञा वशवर्त्तिनी ७
Life in the household is meant for happiness, and the wife is the foundation of happiness in the home. She is an excellent wife who is well-mannered, understanding, and cooperative. ७

दुःखा ह्यन्या सदा खिन्ना चित्तभेदः परस्परम् प्रतिकूलकलत्रस्य द्विदारस्य विशेषतः ८
An unsuitable wife is a source of sorrow, always distressed and causing discord between the couple; this is especially so when a man has two wives. ८

योषित्सर्वा जलौकेव भूषणाच्छादनाशनैः सुभूत्यापि कृता नित्यं पुरुषं ह्यपकर्षति ९
A woman, like a leech, continually draws a man away through ornaments, clothing, food, and even through prosperity, however well provided for she may be. ९

जलौका रक्तमादत्ते केवलं सा तपस्विनी इतरा तु धनं वित्तं मांसं वीर्यं बलं सुखम् १०
A leech takes only blood and is therefore comparatively harmless; the other takes wealth, possessions, bodily substance, vitality, strength, and happiness. १०

सशङ्का वालभावे तु यौवने विमुखी भवेत् तृणवन्मन्यते पश्चाद्वद्धभावे स्वकं पतिम् ११
When she is suspicious in childhood, she may become estranged in youth and later, after becoming attached elsewhere, may regard her own husband as worthless like a blade of grass. ११

अनुकूला नवाग्दुष्टा दक्षा साध्वी पतिव्रता एभिरेव गुणैर्युक्ता श्रीरेव स्त्री न संशयः १२
A woman who is agreeable, free from harsh speech, capable, virtuous, and devoted to her husband—endowed with these qualities, she is truly the embodiment of prosperity; there is no doubt about it. १२

या हृष्टमनसा नित्यं स्थानमानविचक्षणा भर्तुः प्रीतिकरी नित्यं सा भार्य्या हीतरा जरा १३
She who is always cheerful, knows how to conduct herself according to place and occasion, and continually brings delight to her husband is a true wife; another is merely a burden of old age. १३

शिष्यो भार्य्या शिशुर्भाता पुत्रो दासः समाश्रितः यस्यैतानि विनीतानि तस्य लोके हि गौरवम् १४
A disciple, wife, child, brother, son, servant, and dependants—one whose household members are well-disciplined and well-mannered receives honour in the world. १४

प्रथमा धर्मपत्नी च द्वितीया रतिवर्द्धिनी दृष्टमेव फलं तत्र नादृष्टमुपजायते १५
The first wife is the wife of dharma, while the second is one who increases sensual enjoyment; in the latter case, the result is visible in this world, and no unseen spiritual fruit arises from it. १५

धर्मपत्नी समाख्याता निर्दोषा यदि सा भवेत् दोषे सति न दोषः स्यादन्या भार्य्या गुणान्विता १६
She is called a dharma-wife if she is without fault. If she has a fault, however, there is no fault in taking another wife who is endowed with good qualities. १६

अदृष्टापतितां भार्यां यौवने यः परित्यजेत् स जीवनान्ते स्त्रीत्वञ्च बन्ध्यत्वञ्च समाप्नुयात् १७
Whoever abandons, during her youth, a wife who has not fallen into misconduct shall, at the end of his life, suffer the consequences of womanhood and barrenness. १७

दरिद्रं व्याधितं चैव भर्त्तारं यावमन्यते शुनी गृध्री च मकरी जायते सा पुनः पुनः १८
A woman who despises her husband because he is poor or afflicted by illness is repeatedly reborn as a bitch, a vulture, or a crocodile. १८

मृते भर्तरि या नारी समारोहेद्धताशनम् सा भवेत्तु शुभाचारा स्वर्गलोके महीयते १९
The woman who, after her husband’s death, ascends the funeral fire becomes one of righteous conduct and is honoured in the heavenly world. १९

व्यालग्राही यथा व्यालं बलादुद्धरते विलात् तथा सा पतिमुद्धत्य तेनैव सह मोदते २०
Just as a serpent-catcher forcibly pulls a serpent out of its hole, so she, having rescued her husband, rejoices together with him. २०

चाण्डालप्रत्यवसितपरिव्राजकतापसाः तेषां जातान्यपत्यानि चाण्डालैः सह वासयेत् २१
The offspring born from Chāṇḍālas, outcasts, wandering ascetics, and ascetics should be made to live together with the Chāṇḍālas. २१

इति दाचे धर्मशास्त्रे चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Dāce Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 11 ---

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Chapter Five

उक्तं शौचमशौचञ्च कार्य्य त्याज्यं मनीषिभिः विशेषार्थं तयोः किञ्चिद्वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया १
The rules concerning purity and impurity have been stated; the wise should observe what is to be done and what is to be avoided. For the sake of further clarification, I shall explain some of their particulars for the welfare of all. १

शौचे यत्नः सदाकार्य्यः शौचमूलोद्विजः स्मृतः शौचाचारविहीनस्य समस्तनिष्फलाः क्रियाः २
One should always make an effort to maintain purity; the twice-born are said to have purity as their foundation. For one who is devoid of pure conduct, all religious actions become fruitless. २

शौचञ्च द्विविधं प्रोक्तं बाह्यमाभ्यन्तरन्तथा मृजलाभ्यां स्मृतं बाह्यं भावशुद्धिस्तथान्तरम् ३
Purity is said to be of two kinds: external and internal. External purity is achieved through earth and water, while internal purity is the purification of one’s inner disposition. ३

अशौचाद्धि वरं बाह्यं तस्मादाभ्यन्तरं वरम् उभाभ्याञ्च शुचिर्यस्तु स शुचिर्नेतरः शुचिः ४
External purity is certainly better than impurity, and internal purity is superior to external purity. Only one who is purified by both is truly pure; no other person is truly pure. ४

एका लिङ्गे गुदे तिस्रो दश वामकरे तथा उभयोः सप्त दातव्या मृदस्तिस्त्रस्तु पादयोः ५
One application of earth should be made to the organ, three to the anus, ten to the left hand, and seven to both hands; three applications of earth should be made to the feet. ५

गृहस्थशौचमाख्यातं त्रिष्वन्येषु यथाक्रमम् द्विगुणं त्रिगुणञ्चैव चतुर्थस्य चतुर्गुणम् ६
This is the prescribed purification for a householder; for the other three stages of life, the quantities are respectively doubled, tripled, and quadrupled. ६

अर्द्धप्रसृतिमात्रन्तु प्रथमा मृत्तिका स्मृता द्वितीया च तृतीया च तदर्द्धं परिकीर्तिता ७
The first measure of earth is prescribed as half a prasṛti; the second and third measures are each said to be half of that amount. ७

लिङ्गेऽप्यत्र समाख्याता त्रिपर्वी पूर्य्यते यया एतच्छौचं गृहस्थानां द्विगुणं ब्रह्मचारिणाम् ८
For the organ too, the prescribed amount is that by which three portions are completed. This is the purification prescribed for householders; for brahmacārins it is doubled. ८

त्रिगुणन्तु वनस्थानां यतीनाञ्च चतुर्गुणम् दातव्यमुदकन्तावन्मृदभावो यथा भवेत् ९
For forest-dwellers it is threefold, and for ascetics fourfold. Water should be used in such quantity that no trace of the earth remains. ९

मृदा जलेन शुद्धिः स्यान्न क्लेशो न धनव्ययः यस्य शौचेऽपि शैथिल्यं चित्तं तस्य परीक्षितम् १०
Purification is achieved through earth and water, without hardship or expenditure of wealth. One whose mind is negligent even regarding purity should be regarded as lacking discipline. १०

अन्यदेव दिवा शौचं रात्रावन्यद्विधीयते अन्यदापत्सु विप्राणामन्यदेव ह्यनापदि ११
The rules of purification prescribed for the daytime are different from those prescribed for the night; for Brāhmaṇas, different rules apply in times of distress and different ones in times free from distress. ११

दिवोदितस्य शौचस्य रात्रावर्द्धं विधीयते तदर्द्धमातुरस्याहुस्त्वरायामर्द्धमध्वनि १२
The purification prescribed for the daytime is to be performed to half the extent at night; for the sick, it is said to be half of that, and in urgent circumstances or while travelling, half again. १२

न्यूनाधिकं न कर्तव्यं शौचे शुद्धिमभीप्सिता प्रायश्चित्तेन युज्येत विहितातिक्रमे कृते १३
One who desires purification should neither perform less nor more than what is prescribed. If the prescribed rule is transgressed, one becomes subject to expiation. १३

इति दाचे धर्मशास्त्रे पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Dāce Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 12 ---


अथ षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Chapter Six

सूतकं तु प्रवक्ष्यामि जन्ममृत्युसमुद्भवम् यावज्जीवं तृतीयन्तु यथावदनुपूर्वशः १
I shall now explain sūtaka, the impurity arising from birth and death, including the third kind that extends throughout life, in its proper order. १

सद्यः शौचं तथैकाहो द्वित्रिचतुरहस्तथा दशाहो द्वादशाहश्च पक्षो मासस्तथैव च २
Purification is prescribed immediately, after one day, after two, three, or four days, after ten days, after twelve days, after a fortnight, and likewise after a month. २

मरणान्तं तथा चान्यद्दशपक्षन्तु सूतके उपन्यस्तक्रमेणैव वक्ष्याम्यहमशेषतः ३
There is also an impurity extending until death, and another extending for ten fortnights; I shall explain all these forms of sūtaka completely in the order in which they have been set forth. ३

ग्रन्थार्थं यो विजानाति वेदमङ्गैः समन्वितम् सकल्पं सरहस्यञ्च क्रियावांश्चेन्न सूतकी ४
One who understands the meaning of the sacred text together with the Vedic auxiliaries, its ritual procedures and secret teachings, and who is diligent in performing the prescribed rites, is not subject to sūtaka. ४

राजविंग्दीक्षितानाञ्च बाले देशान्तरे तथा व्रतिनां सत्रिणाञ्चैव सद्यः शौचं विधीयते ५
Immediate purification is prescribed for kings, initiated sacrificers, children, those residing in distant lands, those observing vows, and those engaged in prolonged sacrificial sessions. ५

एकाहस्तु समाख्यातो योऽग्निवेदसमन्वितः हीने हीनतरे चैव द्वित्रिचतुरहस्तथा ६
One day of impurity is prescribed for one endowed with sacred fires and Vedic knowledge; for those of lesser and still lesser qualification, it is prescribed for two, three, or four days respectively. ६

जातिविप्रो दशाहेन द्वादशाहेन भूमिपः वैश्य पञ्चदशाहेन शूद्रो मासेन शुद्धयति ७
A Brāhmaṇa by birth becomes pure after ten days; a Kṣatriya after twelve days; a Vaiśya after fifteen days; and a Śūdra after one month. ७

अस्त्रात्वा चाप्यहुत्वा च भुङ्गेऽदत्वा च यः पुनः एवं विधस्य सर्वस्य सूतकं समुदाहृतम् व्याधितस्य कदर्य्यस्य ऋणग्रस्तस्य सर्वदा क्रियाहीनस्य मूर्खस्य स्त्रीजितस्य विशेषतः ८
For one who eats without bathing, without offering the prescribed oblation, and without giving what ought to be given, sūtaka is prescribed. The same applies especially to one who is diseased, miserly, burdened with debt, continually neglectful of religious duties, foolish, or dominated by his wife. ८

व्यसनासक्तचित्तस्य पराधीनस्य नित्यशः श्रद्धात्यागविहीनस्य भस्मान्तं सूतकं भवेत् ९
For one whose mind is attached to vice, who is continually dependent upon others, and who has abandoned faith, sūtaka lasts until death. ९

न सूतकं कदाचित्स्याद्यावज्जीवन्तु सूतकम् एवं गुणविशेषेण सूतकं समुदाहृतम् १०
For some there is never an ordinary period of sūtaka; for them, sūtaka extends throughout life. Thus sūtaka is prescribed according to these distinctions of character and conduct. १०

सूतके मृतके चैव तथा च मृतसूतके एतत्संहतशौचानां मृतशौचेन शुद्धयति ११
In cases of sūtaka from birth, death, or the combination of death and birth impurity, when these impurities occur together, purification is attained through the period of death impurity. ११

दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः स्वाध्यायश्च निवर्तते दशाहात्तु परं शौचं विप्रोऽर्हति च धर्मवित् १२
Charity, accepting gifts, fire offerings, and Vedic study are suspended during this period. After ten days, a Brāhmaṇa who knows dharma becomes entitled to resume purity. १२

दानञ्च विधिना देयं अशुभात्तारकं हि तत् मृतकान्ते मृतो यस्तु सूतकान्ते च सूतकम् १३
Charity should be given according to the prescribed rules, for it carries one beyond misfortune. When a death occurs at the end of sūtaka, or sūtaka occurs at the end of death impurity, the rules are to be applied accordingly. १३

एतत्संहतशौचानां पूर्वाशौचेन शुद्धयति उभयत्र दशाहानि कुलस्यान्नं न भुज्यते १४
When these impurities coincide, purification is attained according to the earlier impurity. In both cases, the family’s food is not to be eaten for ten days. १४

चतुर्थेऽहनि कर्तव्यमस्थि सञ्चयनं द्विजैः ततः सञ्चयनादूर्द्धमङ्गस्पर्शो विधीयते १५
The twice-born should collect the bones on the fourth day; after the bone-collection ceremony, physical contact is permitted. १५

वर्णानामानुलोम्येन स्त्रीणामेको यदा पतिः दशषत्र्यहमेकाहः प्रसवे सूतकं भवेत् १६
According to the order of the varṇas, when a woman has one husband, the period of sūtaka following childbirth is prescribed as one day, ten days, or thirteen days according to the applicable circumstances. १६

यज्ञकाले विवाहे च देशभङ्गे तथैव च हूयमाने तथाग्नौ च नाशौचं मृतसूतके १७
During a sacrifice, at a wedding, during a disruption or calamity affecting the country, and while the sacred fire is being offered into, there is no impurity from death or birth. १७

स्वस्थकाले त्विदं सर्वमशौचं परिकीर्तितम् आपद्गतस्य सर्वस्य सूतके न तु सूतकम् १८
All these rules concerning impurity are prescribed for normal circumstances; for one who is in a state of distress or emergency, sūtaka itself does not apply. १८

इति दाक्षे धर्मशास्त्रे षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Dākṣa Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 13 ---


अथ सप्तमोऽध्यायः
chapter 7 

लोको वशीकृतो येन येन चात्मा वशीकृतः इन्द्रियार्थो जितो येन तं योगं प्रब्रवीम्यहम् १
I shall describe that yoga by which the world is brought under control, the self is brought under control, and the objects of the senses are conquered. १

प्राणायामस्तथा ध्यानं प्रत्याहारस्तु धारणा तर्कश्चैव समाधिश्च षडङ्गो योग उच्यते २
Prāṇāyāma, meditation, withdrawal of the senses, concentration, reasoning, and samādhi—these six are said to constitute yoga. २

नारण्यसेवनाद्योगो नानेकग्रन्थचिन्तनात् व्रतैयज्ञैस्तपोभिश्च न योगः कस्यचिद्भवेत् ३
Yoga does not arise merely from dwelling in the forest, nor from contemplating numerous scriptures, nor does it arise for anyone merely through vows, sacrifices, or austerities. ३

न च पथ्याशनाद्योगो न नासाग्रनिरीक्षणात् न च शास्त्रातिरिक्तेन शौचेन स भवेत्क्वचित् ४
Yoga does not arise merely from eating wholesome food, nor from gazing at the tip of the nose, nor from practicing purity beyond what is prescribed by the scriptures. ४

न मौनमन्त्रकुहकैरनेकैः सुकृतैस्तथा लोकयात्रावियुक्तस्य योगो भवति कस्यचित् ५
Yoga does not arise for anyone merely through various forms of silence, mantras, deceptive practices, or other meritorious acts, while being detached from the conduct of worldly life. ५

अभियोगात्तथाभ्यासात्तस्मिन्नेव तु निश्चयात् पुनः पुनश्च निर्वेदाद्योगः सिद्धयति नान्यथा ६
Yoga is accomplished through dedicated effort, constant practice, firm determination in it, and repeated dispassion; it is not accomplished otherwise. ६

आत्मचिन्ताविनोदेन शौचक्रीडनकेन च सर्व्वभूतसमत्वेन योगः सिध्यति नान्यथा ७
Yoga is accomplished through delight in contemplation of the Self, through the play of purity, and through seeing all beings with equanimity; it is not accomplished otherwise. ७

यश्चात्मनिरतो नित्यमात्मक्रीडस्तथैव च आत्मनिष्ठश्च सततमात्मन्येव स्वभावतः ८
One who is constantly devoted to the Self, who delights in the Self, and who is ever established in the Self by his very nature, ८

रतश्चैव स्वयं तुष्टः सन्तुष्टो नान्यमानसः आत्मन्येव सुतृप्तोऽसौ योगस्तस्य प्रसिद्धयति ९
who delights in it, is satisfied within himself, is content without depending upon another, and is completely fulfilled in the Self—yoga becomes firmly established in him. ९

सुप्तोऽपि योगयुक्तः स्याज्जाग्रच्चापि विशेषतः ईदृक्चेष्टः स्मृतः श्रेष्ठो गरिष्ठो ब्रह्मवादिनाम् १०
Even while asleep he remains united with yoga, and especially while awake; one whose conduct is thus is regarded as the foremost and most exalted among those who speak of Brahman. १०

य आत्मव्यतिरेकेण द्वितीयं नैव पश्यति ब्रह्मीभूय स एवं हि दक्षपक्ष उदाहृतः ११
He who sees no second thing apart from the Self, having become one with Brahman, is indeed described as belonging to the path of Dakṣa. ११

विषयासक्तचित्तो हि यतिर्मोक्षं न विन्दति यत्नेन विषयासक्तिं तस्माद्योगी विवर्जयेत् १२
A renunciant whose mind is attached to sense objects does not attain liberation; therefore, a yogī should diligently abandon attachment to sense objects. १२

विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगः केचिद्योगं वदन्ति हि अधर्मो धर्मरूपेण गृहीतस्तैरपण्डितैः १३
Some indeed call the union of the sense objects with the senses yoga; those undiscerning people have mistaken adharma for dharma. १३

मनसश्चात्मनश्चैव संयोगञ्च तथापरे उक्तानामधिका ह्येते केवलं योगवञ्चिताः १४
Others likewise say that the union of the mind and the Self is yoga; these are merely more deluded than those already mentioned, for they are deprived of true yoga. १४

--- Page 15 ---

वृत्तिहीनं मनः कृत्वा क्षेत्रज्ञं परमात्मनि एकीकृत्य विमुच्येत योगोऽयं मुख्य उच्यते १५
Having made the mind free from mental modifications and united the knower of the field with the Supreme Self, one becomes liberated; this is said to be the highest form of yoga. १५

कषायमोहविक्षेपलज्जाशङ्कादिचेतसः व्यापारास्तु समाख्यातास्तान् जित्वा वशमानयेत् १६
The activities of the mind such as latent passions, delusion, distraction, shame, doubt, and others are described; having conquered them, one should bring them under control. १६

कुटम्वैः पञ्चभिर्गाम्यैः षष्ठस्तत्र महत्तरः देवासुरमनुष्यैस्तु स जेतुं नैव शक्यते १७
There are five ordinary enemies, with a sixth that is greater than them; even gods, demons, and human beings are unable to conquer them. १७

वलेन परराष्ट्राणि गृह्णन् शूरस्तु नोच्यते जितो येनेन्द्रियग्रामः स शूरः कथ्यते बुधैः १८
One who conquers foreign kingdoms by force is not called a hero; by the wise, he is called a hero who has conquered the entire group of senses. १८

बहिर्मुखानि सर्वाणि कृत्वा चाभिमुखानि वै सर्वञ्चैवेन्द्रियग्रामं मनश्चात्मनि योजयेत् १९
Having turned all the senses away from external objects and directed them inward, one should unite the entire group of senses and the mind with the Self. १९

सर्वभावविनिर्मुक्तः क्षेत्रज्ञं ब्रह्मणि न्यसेत् एतद्ध्यानञ्च योगश्च शेषाः स्युर्ग्रन्थविस्तराः २०
Freed from all mental states and conditions, one should place the knower of the field in Brahman; this is meditation and yoga, while all else is merely an elaboration of scriptures. २०

त्यक्त्वा विषयभोगांश्च मनो निश्चलतां गतम् आत्मशक्तिस्वरूपेण समाधिः परिकीर्त्तितः २१
Having abandoned the enjoyment of sense objects, when the mind becomes completely steady in the nature of its own Self-power, that is called samādhi. २१

चतुर्णां सन्निकर्षेण पदं यत्तदशाश्वतम् द्वयोस्तु सन्निकर्षेण शाश्वतं ध्रुवमक्षयम् २२
That state which arises through the conjunction of the four is impermanent; through the conjunction of the two, it is eternal, constant, and imperishable. २२

यन्नास्ति सर्वलोकस्य तदस्तीति विरुद्धयते कथ्यमानं तथान्यस्य हृदये नावतिष्ठते २३
What does not exist for the whole world cannot be asserted to exist; likewise, what is spoken of does not become established in another person's heart. २३

स्वसंवेद्यं हि तद्ब्रह्म कुमारीमैथुनं यथा अयोगी नैव जानाति जातोन्धो हि यथा घटम् २४
That Brahman is known only through one's own direct experience, just as the experience of a maiden's union cannot be known by another; a person devoid of yoga cannot know it, just as one born blind cannot know a pot. २४

नित्याभ्यसनशीलस्य सुसंवेद्यं हि तद्भवेत् तत्सूक्ष्मत्वादनिर्देश्यं परं ब्रह्म सनातनम् २५
For one who is constantly devoted to practice, it becomes directly knowable; because of its subtle nature, the Supreme Brahman, which is eternal, cannot be adequately described. २५

बुधस्त्वाभरणं भावं मनसालोचनं यथा मन्यते स्त्री च मूर्खश्च तदेव बहुमन्यते २६
As a wise person regards an ornament merely as a concept apprehended by the mind, a woman and a fool may regard that very thing as highly valuable. २६

सत्त्वोत्कटाः सुराश्चापि विषयेण वशीकृताः प्रमादिभिः क्षुद्रसत्वैर्मानुषैरत्र का कथा २७
Even gods who are endowed with great purity are brought under the control of sense objects; what, then, need be said of heedless human beings of lesser understanding? २७


--- Page 16 ---

तस्मात्त्यक्तकषायेण कर्त्तव्यं दण्डधारणम् इतरस्तु न शक्नोति विषयैरभिभूयते २८
Therefore, one who has abandoned the impurities of the mind should undertake the discipline of the staff; the other, being unable to do so, is overcome by the sense objects. २८

न स्थिरं क्षणमप्येकमुदकं हि यथोर्मिभिः वाताहतं तथा चित्तं तस्मात्तस्य न विश्वसेत् २९
Just as water struck by waves and wind does not remain still even for a single moment, so too is the mind; therefore, one should not place complete trust in it. २९

त्रिदण्डव्यपदेशेन जीवन्ति बहवो नराः यो हि ब्रह्म न जानाति न त्रिदण्डार्ह एव सः ३०
Many people live merely under the designation of bearers of the three staffs; but one who does not know Brahman is not worthy of bearing the three staffs at all. ३०

ब्रह्मचर्यं सदा रक्षेदष्टधा मैथुनं पृथक् स्मरणं कीर्त्तनं केलिः प्रेक्षणं गुह्यभाषणम् ३१
One should always preserve celibacy; sexual engagement is said to be of eight distinct kinds: remembering, speaking about it, playful interaction, gazing, and intimate conversation. ३१

सङ्कल्पोऽध्यवसायश्च क्रियानिष्पत्तिरेव च एतन्मैथुनमष्टाङ्गं प्रवदन्ति मनीषिणः ३२
Imagination, determination, and the actual accomplishment of the act—these complete the eightfold form of sexual engagement, as the wise declare. ३२

न ध्यातव्यं न वक्तव्यं कर्त्तव्यं कदाचन एतैः सर्वैः सुसम्पन्नो यतिर्भवति नेतरः ३३
None of these should ever be contemplated, spoken of, or performed; a renunciant becomes truly established only when he is completely free from all these, and not otherwise. ३३

पारिव्रज्यं गृहीत्वा च यो धर्मे नावतिष्ठते श्वपदेनाङ्कयित्वा तं राजा शीघ्रं प्रवासयेत् ३४
Having undertaken the life of a wandering renunciant, if one does not remain established in its discipline, the king should mark him as a beast and swiftly banish him. ३४

एको भिक्षुर्यथोक्तस्तु द्वौ चैव मिथुनं स्मृतम् त्रयो ग्रामस्तथा ख्यात ऊर्ध्वन्तु नगरायते ३५
One mendicant alone is as prescribed; two are regarded as a pair; three are known as a village, and beyond that it becomes a town. ३५

नगरं हि न कर्त्तव्यं ग्रामो वा मिथुनं तथा एतत्त्रयं प्रकुर्वाणः स्वधर्माच्चयवते यतिः ३६
A renunciant should not establish a town, a village, or even a pair; one who creates these three falls away from his own discipline. ३६

राजवार्त्तादि तेषान्तु भिक्षावार्त्ता परस्परम् स्नेहपैशून्यमात्सर्य्य सन्निकर्षादसंशयम् ३७
For such people, talk of kings and other worldly matters, discussion of alms among themselves, attachment, slander, and jealousy inevitably arise from close association. ३७

लाभपूजानिमित्तं हि व्याख्यानं शिष्यसंग्रहः एते चान्ये च बहवः प्रपञ्चाः कुतपस्विनाम् ३८
Discourses undertaken for the sake of gain and honor, gathering disciples, and many other such worldly entanglements belong to false ascetics. ३८

ध्यानं शौचं तथा भिक्षा नित्यमेकान्तशीलता भिक्षोश्चत्वारि कर्माणि पञ्चमो नोपपद्यते ३९
Meditation, purity, begging for alms, and constant devotion to solitude are the four duties of a mendicant; there is no fifth. ३९

तपोजपैः कृशीभूतो व्याधितोऽवसथावहः वृद्धो ग्रहगृहीतश्च यश्चान्यो विकलेन्द्रियः ४०
One who has become emaciated through austerities and recitation, one who is diseased, one who is unable to find shelter, one who is aged, one afflicted by planetary influences, and anyone else whose senses are impaired, ४०


--- Page 17 ---


नीरुजश्च युवा चैव भिक्षुर्नावसथावहः स दूषयति तत्स्थानं बुधान् पीडयतीति च ४१
A mendicant who is healthy and young should not become a burden upon a dwelling; by doing so, he defiles that place and causes distress to the wise. ४१

नीरुजश्च युवा चैव ब्रह्मचर्य्याद्विनश्यति ब्रह्मचर्य्याद्विनष्टस्तु कुलञ्चैव तु नाशयेत् ४२
A healthy and young person who abandons celibacy is ruined through the loss of celibacy; having fallen from celibacy, he also brings ruin upon his family. ४२

वसन्नावसथे भिक्षुर्मैथुनं यदि सेवते तस्यावसथनाथस्य मूलान्यपि निकृन्तति ४३
If a mendicant, while staying in a dwelling, engages in sexual intercourse, he cuts off even the roots of the prosperity of the master of that dwelling. ४३

आश्रमे तु यतिर्यस्य मुहूर्त्तमपि विश्रमेत् किन्तस्यान्येन धर्मेण कृतकृत्योऽभिजायते ४४
If a renunciant rests even for a moment in whose āśrama, by what other religious merit could that person be considered to have fulfilled his purpose? ४४

समितं यद्गहस्थेन पापमामरणान्तिकम् स निर्दहति तत्सर्व्वमेकरात्रोषितो यतिः ४५
Whatever sin a householder may have accumulated throughout his life, a renunciant who stays there for a single night burns it all away. ४५

योगाश्रमपरिश्रान्तं यस्तु भोजयते यतिम् निखिलं भोजितं तेन त्रैलोक्यं सचराचरम् ४६
Whoever feeds a renunciant exhausted from the practice of yoga has, by that act of feeding, fed the entire three worlds together with all that moves and does not move. ४६

यस्मिन् देशे वसेद्योगी ध्यानयोगविचक्षणः सोऽपि देशो भवेत्पूतः किंपुनस्तस्य वान्धवाः ४७
Whatever land a yogī skilled in meditation and yoga dwells in becomes purified; what then can be said of his relatives? ४७

द्वैतञ्चैव तथाद्वैतं द्वैताद्वैतं तथैव च न द्वैतं नापि चाद्वैतमित्येतत्परमार्थिकम् ४८
There is dualism, non-dualism, and dualistic non-dualism; but that which is neither dualism nor non-dualism is said to be the highest ultimate reality. ४८

नाहं नैवान्यसम्बन्धो ब्रह्मभावेन भावितः ईदृशायामवस्थायामवाप्यं परमं पदम् ४९
There is no sense of “I,” nor any relationship with another; when one is absorbed in the state of Brahman, the Supreme State is attained. ४९

द्वैतपक्षाः समाख्याता येऽद्वैते तु व्यवस्थिताः अद्वैतिनां प्रवक्ष्यामि यथा धर्मः सुनिश्चितः ५०
The various positions concerning dualism have been described; now, for those established in non-dualism, I shall explain how their dharma is firmly established. ५०

तत्रात्मव्यतिरेकेण द्वितीयं यदि पश्यति ततः शास्त्राण्यधीयन्ते श्रूयन्ते ग्रन्थसञ्चयाः ५१
If there one perceives a second thing apart from the Self, then the scriptures are studied and collections of texts are heard. ५१

दक्षशास्त्रं यथा प्रोक्तमशेषाश्रममुत्तमम् अधीयन्ते तु ये विप्रास्ते यान्त्यमरलोकताम् ५२
Those Brāhmaṇas who study the Dakṣa Śāstra, which has been taught as the supreme teaching concerning all the āśramas, attain the world of the immortals. ५२

इदन्तु यः पठेद्भक्त्या शृणुयादधमोऽपिवा स पुत्रपौत्रपशुमान् कीर्त्तिञ्च समवाप्नुयात् ५३
Whoever reads or listens to this with devotion, even if he is of low standing, obtains sons, grandsons, cattle, and fame. ५३

श्रावयित्वा त्विदं शास्त्रं श्राद्धकालेऽपि वा द्विजः अक्षयं भवति श्राद्धं पितृभ्यश्चोपजायते ५४
If a twice-born person causes this scripture to be recited even during a śrāddha, that śrāddha becomes imperishable, and lasting benefit arises for the ancestors. ५४

इति दाक्षे धर्मशास्त्रे सप्तमोऽध्यायः समाप्ता चेयं दक्षस्मृतिः
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Dakṣa Dharmaśāstra; this is the Dakṣa Smṛti.

