--- Page 1 ---
लिखितस्मृतिः
The Likhita Smṛti.

अथेष्टापूर्तकर्म वृषोत्सर्गफल गयापिण्डदान षोडश श्राद्धानि वर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the rites of Iṣṭa and Pūrtā, the merit of releasing a bull, the offering of piṇḍas at Gayā, and the sixteen Śrāddhas.

इष्टापूर्ते तु कर्तव्ये ब्राह्मणेन प्रयत्नतः इष्टेन लभते स्वर्गं पूर्ते मोक्षमवाप्नुयात् १
A Brāhmaṇa should diligently perform the rites of Iṣṭa and Pūrtā; through Iṣṭa he attains heaven, and through Pūrtā he attains liberation. १

एकाहमपि कर्तव्यं भूमिष्ठमुदकं शुभम् कुलानि तारयेत्सप्त यत्र गौर्वितृषी भवेत् २
Even water established upon the earth should be provided for a single day; wherever a cow is able to quench her thirst, it delivers seven generations of the family. २

भूमिदानेन ये लोका गोदानेन च कीर्तिताः ताँल्लोकान्प्राप्नुयान्मर्त्यः पादपानां प्ररोपणे ३
The worlds that are said to be attained through the gift of land and through the gift of cows are attained by a mortal through planting trees. ३

वापीकूपतडागानि देवतायतनानि च पतितान्युद्धरेद्यस्तु स पूर्तफलमश्नुते ४
Whoever restores fallen or ruined stepwells, wells, reservoirs, and temples of the deities obtains the merit of Pūrtā. ४

अग्निहोत्रं तपः सत्यं वेदानां चैव पालनम् आतिथ्यं वैश्वदेवं च इष्टमित्यभिधीयते ५
Agnihotra, austerity, truthfulness, the preservation and study of the Vedas, hospitality, and the Vaiśvadeva rite are called Iṣṭa. ५

इष्टापूर्ते द्विजातीनां सामान्यो धर्म उच्यते अधिकारी भवेच्छूद्रः पूर्ते धर्मे न वैदिके ६
Iṣṭa and Pūrtā are declared to be the common duties of the twice-born; a Śūdra is eligible for the duty of Pūrtā, but not for the Vedic rites. ६

यावदस्थि मनुष्यस्य गङ्गातोयेषु तिष्ठति तावद्वर्षसहस्राणि स्वर्गलोके महीयते ७
For as long as the bones of a person remain in the waters of the Gaṅgā, for that many thousands of years he is honored in the heavenly world. ७

देवतानां पितृणां च जले दद्याज्जलाञ्जलीन् असंस्कृतमृतानां च स्थले दद्याज्जलाञ्जलिम् ८
One should offer handfuls of water to the deities and ancestors in water, while for those who have died without the prescribed rites, the offering of water should be made upon the ground. ८

एकादशाहे प्रेतस्य यस्य चोत्सृज्यते वृषः मुच्यते प्रेतलोकात्तु पितृलोकं स गच्छति ९
When a bull is released for a deceased person on the eleventh day, he is freed from the realm of the departed and goes to the realm of the ancestors. ९

एष्टव्या बहवः पुत्रा यद्येकोऽपि गयां व्रजेत् यजेत वाऽश्वमेधेन नीलं वा वृषमुत्सृजेत् १०
One should desire many sons, even if only one of them goes to Gayā; or he should perform the Aśvamedha, or release a blue bull. १०

वाराणस्यां प्रविष्टस्तु कदाचिन्निष्क्रमेद्यदि हसन्ति तस्य भूतानि अन्योन्यं करताडनैः ११
If one who has entered Vārāṇasī ever comes out again, the beings there laugh at him, clapping their hands at one another. ११


--- Page 2 ---

गयाशिरे तु यत्किंचिन्नाम्ना पिण्डं तु निर्वपेत् नरकस्था दिवं यान्ति स्वगस्था मोणमाप्नुयुः १२
If one offers a piṇḍa at Gayāśiras in the name of anyone whatsoever, those dwelling in hell go to heaven, while those already dwelling in heaven attain liberation. १२

आत्मनो वा परस्यापि गयाकूपे यतस्ततः यन्नाम्ना पातयेत्पिण्डं तं नयेद्ब्रह्म शाश्वतम् १३
Whether for oneself or for another, if one offers a piṇḍa at the Gayā well in anyone's name, that person is led to the eternal Brahman. १३

लोहितो यस्तु वर्णेन शङ्खवर्णखुरः स्मृतः लाङ्ग्लशिरसोश्चैव स वै नीलवृषः स्मृतः १४
The bull that is reddish in color, with hooves of the color of a conch, and with a tail and head of the same description, is known as the Nīla bull. १४

नवश्राद्धं त्रिपक्षं च द्वादशैव तु मासिकम् षण्मासौ चाऽऽब्दिकं चैव श्राद्धान्येतानि षोडश १५
The nine Śrāddhas, the three fortnightly Śrāddhas, the twelve monthly Śrāddhas, the six-monthly and the annual Śrāddha—these are the sixteen Śrāddhas. १५

यस्यैतानि न कुर्वीत एकोद्दिष्टानि षोडश पिशाचत्वं स्थिरं तस्य दत्तैः श्राद्धशतैरपि १६
For one who does not perform these sixteen Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddhas, a permanent state of being a piśāca is said to result, even if hundreds of Śrāddhas are subsequently offered. १६

सपिण्डीकरणादूर्ध्वं प्रतिसंवत्सरं द्विजः मातापित्रोः पृथक्कुर्यादेकोद्दिष्टं मृतेऽहनि १७
After the Sapinḍīkaraṇa, a twice-born should, every year, perform a separate Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha for his mother and father on the day of their death. १७

वर्षे वर्षे तु कर्तव्यं मात्रापित्रोस्तु संततम् अदैवं भोजयेच्छ्राद्धं पिण्डमेकं तु निर्वपेत् १८
It should be performed every year continually for the mother and father; the Śrāddha should be offered without the rites addressed to the gods, and a single piṇḍa should be offered. १८

संक्रान्तावुपरागे च सर्वोत्सवमहालये निर्वाप्यास्तु त्रयः पिण्डा एकतस्तु क्षयेऽहनि १९
At a Saṅkrānti, an eclipse, a great festival, or during Mahālaya, three piṇḍas should be offered; on the day of the monthly death observance, one should be offered separately. १९

एकोद्दिष्टं परित्यज्य पार्वणं कुरुते द्विजः अकृतं तद्विजानीयात्स मातृपितृघातकः २०
If a twice-born abandons the Ekoddiṣṭa and performs the Pārvaṇa instead, that rite should be regarded as not performed; he is considered a slayer of his mother and father. २०

अमावास्यां तु क्षयो यस्य प्रेतपक्षेऽथ वा यदि सपिण्डीकरणादूर्ध्वं तस्योक्तः पार्वणो विधिः २१
If the death-day observance falls on the new-moon day or during the Pitṛpakṣa, then after Sapinḍīkaraṇa the Pārvaṇa procedure is prescribed for him. २१

त्रिदण्डग्रहणादेव प्रेतत्वं नैव जायते अहन्येकादशे प्राप्ते पार्वणं तु विधीयते २२
Merely by taking the threefold staff, the state of being a departed spirit does not arise; when the eleventh day is reached, the Pārvaṇa rite is prescribed. २२

यस्य संवत्सरादर्वाक्सपिण्डीकरणं स्मृतम् प्रत्यहं तत्सोदकुम्भं दद्यात्संवत्सरं द्विजः पत्या चैकेन कर्तव्यं सपिण्डीकरणं स्त्रियाः २३
For one whose Sapinḍīkaraṇa is prescribed before the completion of a year, a twice-born should offer a water-filled vessel for that person every day for a year; for a woman, the Sapinḍīkaraṇa should be performed together with her husband. २३

पितामह्याऽपि तत्तस्मिन्सत्येवं तु क्षयेऽहनि तस्यां सत्यां प्रकर्तव्यं तस्याः श्वश्वेति निश्चितम् २४
The same applies to the paternal grandmother; when she is living, the rite should be performed on the appropriate death-day, and when she is present, it is definitively to be performed for her mother-in-law. २४

--- Page 3 ---

विवाहे चैव निर्वृत्ते चतुर्थेऽहनि रात्रिषु एकत्वं सा गता भर्तुः पिण्डे गोत्रे च सूतके २५
After the marriage has been completed, on the fourth day and night, she becomes united with her husband in relation to the funeral offerings, lineage, and rules concerning ritual impurity. २५

स्वगोत्राद्भश्यते नारी उद्वाहात्सप्तमे पदे भर्तृगोत्रेण कर्तव्यं दानं पिण्डोदकक्रियाः २६
A woman leaves her own lineage upon the seventh step of marriage; thereafter, offerings, piṇḍa offerings, and water rites should be performed according to her husband's lineage. २६

द्विमातुः पिण्डदानं तु पिण्डे पिण्डे द्विनामतः षण्णां देयास्त्रयः पिण्डा एवं दाता न मुह्यति २७
For one who has two mothers, the piṇḍa offering should bear two names for each piṇḍa; three piṇḍas should be offered for the six persons, and in this way the giver does not become confused. २७

अथ चेन्मन्त्रविद्युक्तः शारीरैः पङ्गिदूषणैः अदूष्यं तं यमः प्राह पङ्गिपावन एव सः २८
If one is connected with a person who knows the mantras but is affected by physical defects of the sacrificial assembly, Yama declares him to be undefiled; indeed, he is a purifier of the assembly. २८

अग्नौकरणशेषं तु विश्वेदेवादि हूयते अग्न्यभावे तु विप्रस्य पाणावेवोपपादयेत् २९
The remainder of the oblation prepared for the fire is offered to the Viśvedevas and others; when there is no fire, it should instead be offered into the hand of a Brāhmaṇa. २९

यो ह्यग्मिः स द्विजो विप्रैर्मन्त्रदर्शिभिरुच्यते ३०
That which is called Agni is, according to the Brāhmaṇas who have vision of the mantras, the twice-born Brāhmaṇa himself. ३०

अजस्य दक्षिणे कर्णे पाणौ विप्रस्य दक्षिणे रजते च सुवर्णे च नित्यं वसति पावकः ३१
Agni eternally resides in the right ear of the goat, in the right hand of a Brāhmaṇa, and in silver and gold. ३१

यत्र यत्र प्रदातव्यं श्राद्धं कुर्वीत पार्वणम् तत्र मातामहानां च कर्तव्यमुभयं सदा ३२
Wherever a Pārvaṇa Śrāddha is to be performed, the rites for the maternal grandfathers and ancestors should also always be performed there. ३२

अपुत्रा ये मृताः केचित्पुरुषा वा स्त्रियोऽपि वा एभ्य एव प्रदातव्यमेकोद्दिष्टं न पार्वणम् ३३
For those who died without sons, whether men or women, the Ekoddiṣṭa offering alone should be given to them, and not the Pārvaṇa Śrāddha. ३३

यस्मिन्राशिगते सूर्ये विपत्तिः स्याद्विजन्मनः तस्मिन्नहनि कर्तव्यं दानं पिण्डोदकक्रिया ३४
When the Sun is situated in the zodiacal sign in which the death of a twice-born person occurred, offerings and the piṇḍa-and-water rites should be performed on that very day. ३४

वर्षवृद्धयाभिषेकादि कर्तव्यमधिके न तु अधिमासे तु पूर्वं स्याच्छ्राद्धं संवत्सरादपि ३५
As the year increases, rites such as the annual observance and ceremonial bathing should be performed in the additional period, but not during an intercalary month; in an intercalary month, the Śrāddha should instead be performed beforehand, even before the completion of the year. ३५

स एव हेयोद्दिष्टस्य येन केन तु कर्मणा अभिघातान्तरं कार्यं तत्रैवाहः कृतं भवेत् ३६
For that same Ekoddiṣṭa rite, whatever ritual is to be performed should be completed with the intervening observance; the act is then regarded as having been performed on that very day. ३६

शालाग्नौ पच्यते ह्यन्नं लौकिके वाथ संशयः यस्मिन्नेव पचेदन्नं तस्मिन्होमो विधीयते ३७
The food is cooked either in the Śālā fire or in the ordinary household fire; in whichever fire the food is cooked, the offering should be made into that same fire. ३७

वैदिके लौकिके वाऽपि नित्यं हुत्वा ह्यतन्द्रितः वैदिके स्वर्गमाप्नोति लौकिके हन्ति किल्विषम् ३८
One should diligently make the oblation regularly, whether in the Vedic fire or the ordinary household fire; through the Vedic fire one attains heaven, while through the ordinary fire one destroys sin. ३८

--- Page 4 ---

अन्नदानेनिषेधः
Prohibition regarding the giving and eating of food.

अग्नौ व्याहृतिभिः पूर्वं हुत्वा मन्त्रौस्तु शाकलैः संविभागं तु भूतेभ्यस्ततोऽश्नीयादनग्निमान् ३९
After first making offerings into the fire with the Vyāhṛtis and then with the Śākala mantras, one should make a share for all beings; thereafter, one who has no sacred fire should eat. ३९

उच्छेषणं तु नोत्तिष्ठेद्यावद्विप्रविसर्जनम् ततो गृहबलिं कुर्यादिति धर्मो व्यवस्थितः ४०
One should not rise leaving the remnants until the Brāhmaṇas have been dismissed; thereafter one should perform the household offering. Thus is the established rule of Dharma. ४०

दर्भाः कृष्णाजिनं मन्त्रा ब्राह्मणाश्च विशेषतः नैते निर्माल्यतां यान्ति नियोक्तव्याः पुनः पुनः ४१
Darbha grass, the black antelope skin, mantras, and Brāhmaṇas in particular never become discarded or impure like ritual remnants; they should be employed again and again. ४१

पानमाचमनं कुर्यात्कुशपाणिः सदा द्विजः भुक्त्वाऽप्युच्छिष्टतां याति एष एव विधिः स्मृतः ४२
A twice-born should always perform drinking and ācamana with kuśa grass in his hand; even after eating, he becomes regarded as having food remnants upon him. This alone is the prescribed rule. ४२

पान आचमने चैव तर्पणे दैविके सदा कुशहस्तो न दुष्येत यथा पाणिस्तथा कुशः ४३
During drinking, ācamana, and offerings of divine oblation, one should always keep kuśa grass in the hand and does not become impure; the kuśa is regarded in the same manner as the hand. ४३

वामपाणौ कुशं कृत्वा दक्षिणेन उपस्पृशेत् आचामन्ति च ये मूढा रुधिरेणाऽऽचमन्ति ते ४४
Having placed kuśa grass in the left hand, one should touch it with the right hand. Those fools who perform ācamana otherwise are as though performing ācamana with blood. ४४

नीवीमध्येषु ये दर्भा ब्रह्मसूत्रेषु ये कृताः पवित्रांस्तान्विजानीयाद्यथा कायस्तथा कुशाः ४५
The darbhas placed in the middle of the garment and those used in the sacred thread should be regarded as purifying; just as the body is, so too are the kuśas. ४५

पिण्डे कृतास्तु ये दर्भा यैः कृतं पितृतर्पणम् मूत्रोच्छिष्टपुरीषं च तेषां त्यागो विधीयते ४६
The darbhas that have been placed in the piṇḍa and those with which the offering to the ancestors has been made, after coming into contact with urine, food remnants, or feces, are prescribed to be discarded. ४६

दैवपूर्वं तु यच्छ्राद्धमदैवं चापि यद्भवेत् ब्रह्मचारी भवेत्तत्र कुर्याच्छ्राद्धं तु पैतृकम् ४७
When a Śrāddha is performed first for the gods and then for the ancestors, the performer should observe celibacy and should perform the ancestral Śrāddha. ४७

मातुः श्राद्धं तु पूर्वं स्यात्पितॄणां तदनन्तरम् ततो मातामहानां च वृद्धौ श्राद्धत्रयं स्मृतम् ४८
The Śrāddha for the mother should be performed first, that for the ancestors thereafter, and then that for the maternal grandfathers; on occasions of increase or prosperity, these three Śrāddhas are prescribed. ४८

क्रतुर्दक्षो वसुः सत्यः कालकामौ धुरिलोचनौ पुरूरवार्द्रवाश्चैव विश्वेदेवाः प्रकीर्तिताः ४९
Kratu, Dakṣa, Vasu, Satya, Kāla, Kāma, Dhurilocana, Purūravas, and Ārdrava are declared to be the Viśvedevas. ४९

आगच्छन्तु महाभागा विश्वेदेवा महाबलाः ये यत्र विहिताः श्राद्धे सावधाना भवन्तु ते ५०
May the greatly blessed and mighty Viśvedevas come; wherever they are prescribed to be present at the Śrāddha, may they remain attentive there. ५०

--- Page 5 ---

इष्टिश्राद्ध क्रतुर्दक्षो वसुः सभ्यश्च वैदिके कालः कामोऽग्निकार्येषु काम्येषु धुरिलोचनौ ५१
For the Iṣṭi-śrāddha, Kratu, Dakṣa, Vasu, and Sabhya are prescribed; for Vedic rites, Kāla and Kāma; for fire-related rites, Kāma; and for rites performed for specific desires, Dhuri and Locana. ५१

पुरूरवार्द्रवश्चैव पार्वणेषु नियोजयेत् ५२
Purūravas and Ārdrava should be appointed for the Pārvaṇa śrāddha. ५२

यस्यास्तु न भवेद् भ्राता न विज्ञायेत वा पिता नोपयच्छेत तां प्राज्ञः पुत्रिकाधर्मशङ्कया ५३
If a girl has no brother, or if her father is unknown, or if her father does not give her in marriage, a wise man should, considering the possibility of the Putrikā-dharma, give her in marriage. ५३

अभ्रातृकां प्रदास्यामि तुभ्यं कन्यामलंकृताम् अस्यां यो जायते पुत्रः स मे पुत्रो भविष्यति ५४
“I shall give you this adorned maiden who has no brother. The son born from her shall become my son.” ५४

मातुः प्रथमतः पिण्डं निर्वपेत्पुत्रिकासुतः द्वितीयं तु पितुस्तस्यास्तृतीयं तु पितुः पितुः ५५
The son of a Putrikā should first offer a piṇḍa to his mother, secondly to her father, and thirdly to her grandfather. ५५

मृण्मयेषु च पात्रेषु श्राद्धे यो भोजयेत्पितॄन् अन्नदाता पुरोधाश्च भोक्ता च नरकं व्रजेत् ५६
Whoever feeds the ancestors at a śrāddha using earthen vessels—the giver of the food, the officiating priest, and the one who eats it—shall go to hell. ५६

अलाभे मृण्मयं दद्यादनुज्ञातस्तु तैर्द्विजैः घृतेन प्रोक्षणं कुर्यान्मृदः पात्रं पवित्रकम् ५७
If other vessels are unavailable, an earthen vessel may be used with the permission of the twice-born; it should be sprinkled with ghee, and the earthen vessel should thereby be made pure. ५७

श्राद्धं कृत्वा परश्राद्धे यस्तु भुञ्जीत विह्वलः पतन्ति पितरस्तस्य लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः ५८
Whoever, after performing a śrāddha, distractedly eats at another person's śrāddha, causes his ancestors to fall; the offerings of piṇḍa and water to them are considered interrupted. ५८

श्राद्धं दत्त्वा च भुक्त्वा च अध्वानं योऽधिगच्छति भवन्ति पितरस्तस्य तन्मासं पांसुभोजनाः ५९
Whoever, after giving and eating at a śrāddha, undertakes a journey, causes his ancestors to subsist on dust for that entire month. ५९

पुनर्भोजनमध्वानं भाराध्ययनमैथुनम् दानं प्रतिग्रहं होमं श्राद्धभुक्त्वाष्ट वर्जयेत् ६०
After eating at a śrāddha, one should avoid these eight: eating again, travelling, carrying heavy burdens, studying, sexual intercourse, giving gifts, accepting gifts, and performing a homa. ६०

--- Page 6 ---

भुञ्जानस्य वर्णनम्
Description concerning one who has eaten (after a Śrāddha meal).

अध्वगामी भवेदश्वः पुनर्भोक्ता च वायसः कर्मकृज्जायते दासः स्त्रीसङ्गेन च सूकरः ६१
One who travels after eating at a Śrāddha becomes like a horse; one who eats again becomes like a crow; one who performs labor becomes like a servant; and one who engages in intercourse becomes like a pig. ६१

दशकृत्वः पिबेदापः सावित्र्या चाभिमन्त्रिताः ततः संध्यामुपासीत शुध्येत तदनन्तरम् ६२
He should drink water ten times, sanctified with the Sāvitrī mantra; thereafter he should perform the Sandhyā worship and thus become purified. ६२

आर्द्रवासास्तु यत्कुर्याद्बहिर्जानु च यत्कृतम् तत्सर्वं निष्फलं कुर्याज्जपहोमप्रतिग्रहम् ६३
Whatever is done while wearing wet clothes, or with the knees uncovered outside, renders japa, homa, and acceptance of gifts fruitless. ६३

चान्द्रायणं नवश्राद्धे पराको मासिके तथा पक्षत्रये तु कृच्छ्रं स्यात्षण्मासे कृच्छ्रमेव च ६४
For transgression connected with the nine Śrāddhas, the Cāndrāyaṇa penance is prescribed; for the monthly Śrāddha, the Parāka penance; for the three fortnights, a Kṛcchra; and likewise for the six-month observance. ६४

ऊनाब्दिके त्रिरात्रं स्यादेकाहः पुनराब्दिके शावे मासस्तु भुक्त्वा वा पादकृच्छ्रो विधीयते ६५
For an incomplete annual rite, a three-night observance is prescribed; for the annual rite itself, a one-day observance; and if one eats during the period of impurity caused by a corpse, a Pāda-Kṛcchra penance is ordained. ६५

सर्पविप्रहतानां च शृङ्गिदंष्ट्रिसरीसृपैः आत्मनस्त्यागिनां चैव श्राद्धमेषां न कारयेत् ६६
Śrāddha should not be performed for those killed by snakes, by horned or fanged creatures and reptiles, or for those who have taken their own lives. ६६

गोभिर्हतं तथोद्बद्धं ब्राह्मणेन तु घातितम् तं स्पर्शयन्ति ये विप्रा गोजाश्वाश्च भवन्ति ते ६७
If a Brāhmaṇa has killed a cow or caused a death by hanging, those Brāhmaṇas who touch him become as impure as cattle or horses. ६७

अग्निदाता तथा चान्ये पाशच्छेदकराश्च ये तप्तकृच्छ्रेण शुध्यन्ति मनुराह प्रजापतिः ६८
Those who provide fire, and those who cut a noose in such circumstances, are purified by the Tapta-Kṛcchra penance, so said Manu Prajāpati. ६८

त्र्यहमुष्णं पिबेदापत्र्यहमुष्णं पयः पिबेत् त्र्यहमुष्णं घृतं पीत्वा वायुभक्षो दिनत्रयम् ६९
For three days one should drink hot water, for three days hot milk, for three days hot ghee, and then subsist on air alone for three days. ६९

गोभूहिरण्यहरणे स्त्रीणां क्षेत्रगृहस्य च यमुद्दिश्य त्यजेत् प्राणांस्तमाहुर्ब्रह्मघातकम् ७०
One who gives up his life while attempting to seize cows, land, gold, women, fields, or houses belonging to another is declared to be a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa. ७०

उद्यताः सह धावन्ते सर्वे ये शस्त्रपाणयः यद्यकोऽपि हनेत्तत्र सर्वे तु ब्रह्मघातकाः ७१
When many armed men rush together to attack, even if only one actually kills, all of them are regarded as guilty of Brahma-slaughter. ७१

बहूनां शस्त्रघातानां यद्येको मर्मघातकः सर्वे तु शुद्धिमिच्छन्ति स एको ब्रह्मघातकः ७२
Among many who strike with weapons, if only one inflicts the fatal wound, all may seek purification, but that one alone is the actual Brahma-slayer. ७२

पतितान्नं यदा भुङ्गे भुङ्गे चाण्डालवेश्मनि स मासार्द्ध चरेद्वारि मासं कामकृतेन तु ७३
If one eats the food of a fallen person, or eats in the house of a Caṇḍāla, he should undergo penance for half a month; if done intentionally out of desire, for a full month. ७३

यो येन पतितेनैव संसर्गं याति मानवः स तस्यैव व्रतं कुर्यात्तत्तत्सत्संसर्गविशुद्धये ७४
Whatever fallen person a man associates with, he should perform the same vow prescribed for that person, in order to become purified from that association. ७४

ब्रह्महा पातकिस्पर्शे स्नानं येन विधीयते तेनैवोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् ७५
The bath prescribed after contact with a Brahma-slayer or other great sinner is likewise prescribed; but one touched by leftovers (ucchiṣṭa) should perform the Prājāpatya penance. ७५

ब्रह्महा च सुरापायी तथैव गुरुतल्पगः महात्त्रि पातकान्याहुस्तत्संसर्गी च पञ्चमः ७६
A Brahma-slayer, a drinker of intoxicating liquor, and one who violates the teacher’s bed are declared the three great sinners; one who associates with them is counted as the fifth offender. ७६


--- Page 7 ---

स्नेहाद्वा यदि वा लोभाद्भयादज्ञानतोऽपि वा कुर्वन्त्यनुग्रहं ये तु तत्पापं तेषु गच्छति ७७
Whether out of affection, greed, fear, or even ignorance, those who show favor to such persons incur their sin. ७७

उच्छिष्टोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टो ब्राह्मणस्तु कदाचन तत्क्षणात्कुरुते स्त्रानमाचमेन शुचिर्भवेत् ७८
If a Brāhmaṇa is ever touched by one who has been touched by leftover food, he should bathe immediately and become purified by performing ācamana. ७८

कुब्जवामनषण्डेषु गद्गदेषु जडेषु च जात्यन्धे बधिरे मूके न दोषः परिवेदने ७९
There is no fault in giving food to the hunchbacked, dwarfs, eunuchs, those with speech impediments, the mentally dull, the congenitally blind, the deaf, or the mute. ७९

क्लीबे देशान्तरस्थे पतिते प्रव्रजितेऽपि वा योगशास्त्राभियुक्ते च न दोषः परिवेदने ८०
There is no fault in giving food to an impotent person, one residing in another land, an outcast, a renunciant, or one devoted to the study and practice of Yoga. ८०

पूरणे कूपवापीनां वृक्षच्छेदनपातने विक्रीणीते अपि ह्यश्वं गोवधं तस्य निर्दिशेत् ८१
For filling up wells and reservoirs, cutting down and felling trees, or even selling a horse, the expiation prescribed is that for killing a cow. ८१

पादेऽङ्गोमवपनं द्विपादे श्मश्रु केवलम् तृतीये तु शिखावर्जं शिखाछेदश्चतुर्थके ८२
For the first quarter, the hair of the body should be shaved; for the second, only the beard; for the third, all except the śikhā; and for the fourth, the śikhā too should be cut. ८२

चण्डालोदकसंस्पर्शे स्नानं येन विधीयते तनैवोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् ८३
The purification prescribed for contact with water touched by a Caṇḍāla is bathing; for one touched by leftover food, the Prājāpatya expiation should likewise be performed. ८३

चण्डालघटभाण्डस्थं यत्तोयं पिबते द्विजः तत्क्षणात्क्षिपते यस्तु प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् ८४
If a twice-born person drinks water kept in a pot or vessel belonging to a Caṇḍāla, and immediately vomits it out, he should perform the Prājāpatya expiation. ८४

यदि न क्षिपते तोयं शरीरे तस्य जीर्यति प्राजापत्यं न दातव्यं कृच्छ्रं सांतपनं चरेत् ८५
If he does not vomit the water and it is digested in his body, the Prājāpatya expiation is not prescribed; he should perform the Sāntapana Kṛcchra. ८५

चरेत्सांतपनं विप्रः प्राजापत्यं तु क्षत्त्रियः तदर्धं तु चरेद्वैश्यः पादं शूद्रे तु दापयेत् ८६
A Brāhmaṇa should perform the Sāntapana; a Kṣatriya, the Prājāpatya; a Vaiśya should perform half of that, and a Śūdra one quarter of it. ८६

रजस्वला यदा स्पृष्टा श्वानसूकरवायसैः उपोष्य रजनीमेकां पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ८७
When a menstruating woman is touched by dogs, pigs, or crows, she becomes purified by fasting for one night and taking the Pañcagavya. ८७

आजानुतः स्त्रानमात्रमानाभेस्तु विशेषतः अत ऊर्ध्वं त्रिरात्रं स्यान्मदिरास्पर्शने मतम् ८८
For contact with liquor, bathing up to the knees is prescribed; up to the navel, it is especially prescribed, and above that, a three-night observance is prescribed. ८८

बालश्चैव दशाहे तु पञ्चत्वं यदि गच्छति सद्य एव विशुध्येत नाशौचं नोदकक्रिया ८९
If a child dies within ten days of birth, he becomes purified immediately; there is neither a period of impurity nor the performance of water offerings. ८९

शावसूतक उत्पन्ने सूतकं तु यदा भवेत् शावेन शुध्यते सूतिर्न सूतिः शावशोधिनी ९०
When impurity arising from a death occurs during the period of birth impurity, the birth impurity is purified by the death impurity; the birth does not purify the death. ९०

षष्ठेन शुध्येतैकाहं पञ्चमे त्वहमेव तु चतुर्थे सप्तरात्रं स्यात्त्रिपुरुषं दशमेऽहनि ९१
Purification takes place on the sixth day; on the fifth, it is completed in one day; on the fourth, it is for seven nights; and on the tenth day, it extends to three generations. ९१

मरणारब्धमाशौचं संयोगो यस्य नाग्निभिः आदाहात्तस्य विज्ञेयं यस्य वैतानिको विधिः ९२
The impurity arising from death, for one whose rites are not connected with the sacred fires, is to be understood as lasting until the cremation, according to the Vaitānika rule. ९२

आममासं घृतं क्षौद्रं स्नेहाश्च फलसंभवाः अन्त्यभाण्डस्थिता ह्येते निष्क्रान्ताः शुचयः स्मृताः ९३
Raw meat, ghee, honey, and oils derived from fruits, when kept in the vessels of the Antyas, are regarded as purified once removed from those vessels. ९३

मार्जनीरजमेष षाण्डं स्नानवस्त्रघटोदकम् नवाम्भसि तथा चैव हन्ति पुण्यं दिवाकृतम् ९४
Dust from a broom, the hair of a sheep, the excrement of a eunuch, water from bathing clothes and vessels, and likewise water from a new vessel destroy the merit acquired during the day. ९४

दिवा कपित्थच्छायायां रात्रौ दधिशमीषु च धात्रीफलेषु सर्वत्र अलक्ष्मीर्वसते सदा ९५
By day, misfortune dwells in the shade of the kapittha tree; at night, in curd, śamī trees, and āmalakī fruits; indeed, it is said to dwell everywhere. ९५

यत्र यत्र च संकीर्णमात्मानं मन्यते द्विजः तत्र तत्र तिलैर्होमो गायत्र्यष्टशतं जपेत् ९६
Wherever a Brāhmaṇa considers himself to have become impure, there he should perform a sesame oblation and recite the Gāyatrī one hundred and eight times. ९६

इति लिखितर्षिप्रोक्तं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम् समाप्तेयं लिखितस्मृतिः
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra spoken by the sage Likhita; thus ends the Likhita Smṛti.

