शङ्खस्मृतिः
The Śaṅkha Smṛti.

श्रीगणेशाय नमः
Salutations to Śrī Gaṇeśa.

प्रथमोऽध्यायः
First Chapter.

अथ ब्राहणादीनां कर्मवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the duties of the Brāhmaṇas and others.

स्वम्भुवे नमस्कृत्य सृष्टिसंहारकारिणे चातुर्वर्ण्यहितार्थाय शङ्खः शास्त्रमथाकरोत् १
Having bowed to Svayambhū, the creator and destroyer of the universe, Śaṅkha composed this scripture for the welfare of the four varṇas. १

यजनं याजनं दानं तथैवाध्यापनक्रियाम् प्रतिग्रहञ्चाध्ययनं विप्रः कर्माणि कारयेत् २
A Brāhmaṇa should perform worship, officiate at sacrifices, give gifts, teach, accept gifts, and study. २

दानमध्ययनञ्चैव यजनञ्च यथाविधि क्षत्त्रियस्य तु वैश्यस्य कर्मेदं परिकीर्तितम् ३
Giving gifts, studying, and performing worship according to the prescribed rule are declared to be the duties of a Kṣatriya and a Vaiśya. ३

क्षत्त्रियस्य विशेषेण प्रजानां परिपालनम् कृपिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं वैश्यस्य परिकीर्तितम् ४
The special duty of the Kṣatriya is the protection of the people; agriculture, protection of cattle, and trade are declared to be the duties of the Vaiśya. ४

शूद्रस्य द्विजशुश्रूषा सर्वशिल्पानि चाप्यथ क्षमा सत्यं दमः शौचं सर्वेषामविशेषतः ५
The service of the twice-born and all crafts belong to the duties of the Śūdra; for everyone, without distinction, patience, truthfulness, self-restraint, and purity are prescribed. ५

ब्राह्मणः क्षत्रियो वैश्यस्त्रयो वर्णा द्विजातयः तेषां जन्म द्वितीयस्तु विज्ञेयं मौञ्जिबन्धनम् ६
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, and Vaiśya are the three varṇas known as twice-born; their second birth is to be understood as the tying of the muñja girdle. ६

आचार्यस्तु पिता प्रोक्तः सावित्री जननी तथा ब्रह्मक्षत्त्रविशाञ्चैव मौञ्जिबन्धनजन्मनि ७
The Ācārya is said to be the father, and Sāvitrī the mother, at the second birth of the Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, and Vaiśya through the tying of the muñja girdle. ७

वृत्त्या शूद्रसमास्तावद्विज्ञेयास्ते विचक्षणैः यावद्वेदेन जायन्ते द्विजा ज्ञेयास्ततः परम् ८
The wise should regard them as equal to Śūdras in conduct until they are born again through the Veda; thereafter they are to be known as twice-born. ८

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the First Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Now, the Second Chapter.

ब्राह्मणादीनां संस्कारवर्णनम्
The description of the rites of purification and initiation of the Brāhmaṇa and others.

गर्भस्य स्फुठताज्ञाने निषेकः परिकीर्तितःततस्तु स्पन्दमात्कार्यं पुंसवनं विचक्षणैः १
When the conception of the embryo becomes evident, the rite of Niṣeka is prescribed; thereafter, when movement is perceived, the wise should perform the Puṃsavana rite. १

षष्ठेऽष्टमे वा सीमन्तो जाते वै जातकर्म च अशौचे तु व्यतिक्रान्ते नामकर्म विधीयते
The Sīmantonnayana is performed in the sixth or eighth month, and after birth the Jātakarma is performed; when the period of impurity has passed, the Nāmakarma is prescribed.

नामधेयञ्च कर्तव्यं वर्णानाञ्च समाक्षरम् माङ्गल्यं ब्राह्मणंस्योक्तं क्षत्त्रियस्य बलान्वितम् २
The name should be given with an appropriate number of syllables according to the varṇa; for a Brāhmaṇa it should signify auspiciousness, and for a Kṣatriya it should signify strength. २

वैश्यस्य धनसंयुक्तं शूद्रस्य तु जुगुप्सितम् शर्मान्तं ब्राह्मणस्योक्तं वर्मान्तं क्षत्रियस्य तु ३
For a Vaiśya it should be associated with wealth, while that of a Śūdra should be contemptuous; a Brāhmaṇa's name should end in “śarman,” and a Kṣatriya's in “varman.” ३

धनान्तं चैव वैश्यस्य दासान्तं वान्त्यजन्मनः चतुर्थे मासि कर्तव्यमादित्यस्य प्रदर्शनम् ४
A Vaiśya's name should end in “dhana,” and that of one born among the Antyajas in “dāsa”; in the fourth month, the showing of the child to the Sun should be performed. ४

षष्ठेऽन्नप्राशनं मासि चूडा कार्या यथाकुलम् गर्भाष्टमेऽब्दे कर्तव्यं ब्राह्मणस्योपनायनम् ५
In the sixth month the Annaprāśana should be performed, and the tonsure according to family custom; in the eighth year from conception, the Upanayana of a Brāhmaṇa should be performed. ५

गर्भादेकादशे राज्ञो गर्भात्तु द्वादशे विशः षोडशाब्दस्तु विप्रस्य द्वाविंशः क्षत्त्रियस्य तु ६
For a king it should be performed in the eleventh year from conception, and for a Vaiśya in the twelfth; the prescribed age for a Brāhmaṇa is sixteen years and for a Kṣatriya twenty-two years. ६

विंशतिः सचतुष्का च वैश्यस्य परिकीर्तिता नाभिभाषेत सावित्रीमत ऊर्ध्वं निवर्तयेत् ७
Twenty-four years are prescribed for the Vaiśya; after this time one should not recite the Sāvitrī and should turn away from the rite. ७

विज्ञातव्यास्त्रयोऽप्येते यथाकालमसंस्कृताः सावित्रीपतिता व्रात्याः सर्वधर्मबहिष्कृताः ८
All three of these, if they do not undergo the rites at the prescribed time, are to be known as fallen from the Sāvitrī and as Vrātyas, excluded from all religious duties. ८

मौञ्जीबन्धो द्विजानान्तु क्रमान्मौञ्जी प्रकीर्तिता मार्गवैयाघ्रवास्तानि कर्माणि ब्रह्मचारिणाम् ९
For the twice-born, the muñja girdle is prescribed according to order; the garments of the Brahmacārins are said to be made respectively from mārga and tiger skin. ९

पर्णपिप्पलबिल्वानां क्रमाद्दण्डाः प्रकीर्तिताः कर्णकेशललाटैस्तु तुल्याः प्रोक्ताः क्रमेण तु १०
Staves made respectively of leaves or wood of palāśa, pippala, and bilva are prescribed; they should respectively be equal in length to the ear, hair, and forehead. १०

अवक्राः सत्वचः सर्वे नाग्निदग्धास्तथैव च यज्ञोपवीतं कर्पासक्षौमोर्णानां यथाक्रमम् ११
All should be straight, with their bark intact, and not scorched by fire; the sacred thread should respectively be made of cotton, flax, and wool. ११

आदिमध्यावसानेषु भवच्छब्दोपलक्षितम् भैक्षस्य वरणं प्रोक्तं वर्णानामनुपूर्वशः १२
For the beginning, middle, and end, the word “bhavat” is prescribed in connection with begging alms, according to the order of the varṇas. १२

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.

अथ तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Now, the Third Chapter.

ब्रह्मचर्याद्याचारवर्णनम्
The description of the conduct of Brahmacarya and related observances.

स गुरुर्यः क्रिया कृत्वा वेदमस्मै प्रयच्छति उपनीय गुरुः शिष्यं शिक्षयेच्छौचमादितः
The Guru is he who, having performed the prescribed rites, imparts the Veda to the student; after initiating the student, the Guru should first teach him purity.

आचारमग्निकार्यं च संध्योपासनमेव च भृतकाध्यापको यस्तु उपाध्यायः स उच्यते १
He should teach conduct, the duties concerning the sacred fire, and Sandhyā worship; one who teaches for remuneration is called an Upādhyāya. १

माता पिता गुरुश्चैव पूजनीयाः सदा नृणाम् क्रियास्तथाऽफलाः सर्वा यस्यैतेऽनादृतास्त्रयः
Mother, father, and Guru are always to be revered by people; all religious rites of one who disrespects these three become fruitless.

प्रयतः कल्यमुत्थाय स्त्रातो हुतहुताशनः कुर्वीत प्रयतो भूत्वा गुरूणामभिवादनम् २
Having risen early, bathed, and offered oblations into the sacred fire, one should, being purified and composed, respectfully salute the Gurus. २

अनुज्ञातश्च गुरुणा ततोऽध्ययनमाचरेत् कृत्वा ब्रह्माञ्जलिं पश्यन् गुरोर्वदनमानतः ३
After receiving the Guru's permission, he should undertake study, holding his hands in reverence and respectfully looking upon the Guru's face. ३

ब्रह्मावसाने प्रारम्भे प्रणवञ्च प्रकीर्तयेत् अनध्यायेष्वध्ययनं वर्जयेच्च प्रयत्नतः ४
At the end and beginning of the recitation of the Veda, he should utter the Praṇava; during periods when study is prohibited, he should carefully abstain from study. ४

चतुर्दशीं पञ्चदशीमष्टमीं राहुसूतकम् उल्कापातं महीकम्पमाशौचं ग्रामविप्लवम् ५
He should abstain from study on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth lunar days, during Rāhu's obscuration, meteor falls, earthquakes, impurity, and disturbances in the village. ५

इन्द्रप्रयागं सुरतं घनसंघातनिस्वनम् वाद्यकोलाहलं युद्धमनध्यायान्विवर्जयेत् ६
He should also abstain from study during Indra-prayāga, sexual activity, the roaring of masses of clouds, the tumult of musical instruments, and warfare. ६

नाधीयीताभियुक्तोऽपि प्रयत्नान्न च वेगतः देवायतनवल्मीकश्मशानशवसन्निधौ भैक्षचर्य्यान्तथा कुर्याद्ब्राह्मणेषु यथाविधि ७
Even when engaged in other duties, he should not study hurriedly or hastily; he should perform his alms-round properly among Brāhmaṇas, avoiding temples, anthills, cremation grounds, and the presence of corpses. ७

गुरुणा चाभ्यनुज्ञातः प्राश्नीयात्प्राङ्गखः शुचिः हितं प्रियं गुरोः कुर्यादहङ्कारविवर्जितः ८
With the Guru's permission, he should eat while facing east, being pure; he should do what is beneficial and pleasing to the Guru, free from arrogance. ८

उपास्य पश्चिमां सन्ध्यां पूजयित्वा हुताशनम् अभिवाद्य गुरुं पश्चादुरोवचनकृद्भवेत् ९
Having performed the evening Sandhyā and worshipped the sacred fire, he should salute the Guru and thereafter follow his instructions. ९

गुरोः पूर्वं समुत्तिष्ठेच्छयीत चरमं तथा मधुमांसाञ्जनं श्राद्धं गीतं नृत्यञ्च वर्जयेत् १०
He should rise before the Guru and go to sleep after him; he should abstain from honey, meat, collyrium, Śrāddha rites, singing, and dancing. १०

हिंसापवादवादांश्च स्त्रीलीलां च विशेषतः मेखलामजिनं दण्डं धारयेच्च प्रयत्नतः अधःशायी भवेन्नित्यं ब्रह्मचारी समाहितः ११
A Brahmacārin should carefully abstain from violence, slander, quarrelling, and especially amorous play with women; he should wear the girdle and deerskin, carry a staff, and always sleep on the ground with a composed mind. ११

एवं कृत्यन्तु कूर्वीत वेदस्वीकरणं बुधः गुरुवे च धनं दत्त्वा स्त्रायाच्च तदनन्तरम् १२
Having performed these duties, the wise student should undertake the formal completion of Vedic study; after giving wealth to the Guru, he should bathe thereafter. १२

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Now, the Fourth Chapter.

विवाहसंस्कारवर्णनम्
The description of the marriage rite.

विन्देत विधिवद्भार्यामसमानार्षगोत्रजाम् मातृतः पञ्चमीञ्चापि पितृतस्त्वथ सप्तमीम् १
One should obtain a wife according to the prescribed rule, who is not of the same ṛṣi lineage or gotra, and who is at least the fifth generation from the mother's side and the seventh from the father's side. १

ब्राह्मो दैवस्तथैवाऽऽर्षः प्राजापत्यस्तथाऽऽसुरः गान्धर्वो राक्षसश्चैव पैशाचश्चाष्टमोऽधमः २
The eight forms of marriage are Brāhma, Daiva, Ārṣa, Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa, and the eighth and lowest, Paiśāca. २

एते धर्मास्तु चत्वारः पूर्वं विप्रे प्रकीर्तिताः गान्धर्वो राक्षसश्चैव क्षत्त्रियस्य प्रशस्यते ३
The first four of these are prescribed for a Brāhmaṇa; Gāndharva and Rākṣasa are praised as appropriate for a Kṣatriya. ३

अप्रार्थितः प्रयत्नेन ब्राह्मस्तु परिकीर्तितः यज्ञेषु ऋत्विजे दैवमादायार्षस्तु गोद्वयम् ४
When the maiden is given without solicitation, it is called the Brāhma marriage; giving her to a priest officiating at a sacrifice is the Daiva form; the Ārṣa form involves taking two cows. ४

प्रार्थितः संप्रदानेन प्राजापत्यः प्रकीर्तितः आसुरेन्द्रविणादानाद्गान्धर्वः समयान्मिथः ५
When the maiden is given upon request, it is called Prājāpatya; the taking of wealth is Āsura, while Gāndharva arises from mutual agreement. ५

राक्षसो युद्धहरणात्पैशाचः कन्यकाच्छलात् तिस्रस्तु भार्य्या विप्रस्य द्वे भार्य्य क्षत्रियस्य तु ६
Rākṣasa is the taking of a maiden by force in battle, while Paiśāca is taking her through deception; a Brāhmaṇa may have three wives, while a Kṣatriya may have two. ६

एकैव भार्य्या वैश्यस्य तथा शूद्रस्य कीर्तिता ब्राह्मणी क्षत्त्रिया वैश्या ब्राह्मणस्य प्रकीर्तिताः ७
A single wife is prescribed for a Vaiśya and likewise for a Śūdra; for a Brāhmaṇa, Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, and Vaiśya women are prescribed as wives. ७

क्षत्त्रिया चैव वैश्या च क्षत्त्रियस्य विधीयते वैश्यैव भार्य्या वैश्यस्य शूद्रा शूद्रस्य कीर्तिता ८
For a Kṣatriya, a Kṣatriya woman and a Vaiśya woman are prescribed; for a Vaiśya, a Vaiśya woman alone is prescribed, and for a Śūdra, a Śūdra woman is prescribed. ८

आपद्यपि न कर्तव्या शूद्रा भार्य्या द्विजन्मना तस्यां तस्य प्रसूतस्य निष्कृतिर्न विधीयते ९
Even in times of distress, a twice-born man should not take a Śūdra woman as his wife; for one born from such a union, no expiation is prescribed. ९

तपस्वी यज्ञशशीलश्च सर्व धमभृतां वरः ध्रुवं शूद्रत्वमाप्नोति शूद्रश्राद्धे त्रयोदशे १०
Even one who is an ascetic and devoted to sacrifice, the foremost among those who uphold dharma, certainly incurs Śūdra status upon participating in the Śrāddha of a Śūdra on the thirteenth day. १०

नीयते तु सपिण्डत्वं येषां श्राद्धं कुलोद्गतम् सर्वे शूद्रत्वमायान्ति यदि स्वर्गजितास्तु ते ११
Those whose ancestral Śrāddha is performed and who thereby acquire a Sapinda relationship all become Śūdras, even if they have attained heaven. ११

सपिण्डीकरणं कार्यं कुलजस्य तथा ध्रुवम् श्राद्धं द्वादशकं कृत्वा श्राद्धे प्राप्ते त्रयोदशे १२
The Sapindīkaraṇa rite should certainly be performed for one belonging to the family; after performing the twelve Śrāddhas, it should be performed when the thirteenth Śrāddha is reached. १२

सपिण्डीकरणे चार्ह न च शूद्रस्तथार्हति तस्मात्सर्वप्रयत्नेन शूद्रां भार्य्या विवर्जयेत् १३
The Śūdra is not eligible for Sapindīkaraṇa; therefore, one should make every effort to avoid taking a Śūdra woman as a wife. १३

पाणिर्याह्यः सवर्णासु गृह्णीयात्क्षत्रिया शरम् वैश्या प्रतोदमादद्याद्वेदने त्वग्रजन्मनः १४
Among women of the same varṇa, the hand should be taken; a Kṣatriya woman should take an arrow, and a Vaiśya woman should take a goad at the marriage of an twice-born man. १४

सा भार्य्या या वहेदग्निं सा भार्य्या या पतिव्रता सा भार्य्या या पतिप्राणा सा भार्य्या या प्रजावती १५
She is a true wife who tends the sacred fire; she is a wife who is devoted to her husband; she is a wife whose life is dedicated to her husband; she is a wife who bears children. १५

लालनीया सदा भार्य्या ताडनीया तथैव च लालिता ताडिता चैव स्त्री श्रीर्भवति नान्यथा १६
A wife should always be cherished, and likewise disciplined; only when both cherished and disciplined does a woman become the embodiment of prosperity, and not otherwise. १६

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.


पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Fifth Chapter.

पंचमहायज्ञाः गृहाश्रमिणांप्रशंसा अतिथिवर्णनम्
The description of the five great sacrifices, the praise of householders, and the description of guests.

पञ्चसूना गृहस्थस्य चुल्ली पेषण्युपस्करः कण्डनी चोदकुम्भश्च तस्य पापस्य शान्तये १
The five sources of harm in a householder's home are the hearth, the grinding stone, the household implements, the pounding apparatus, and the water-pot; the five great sacrifices are prescribed for the removal of the sins arising from them. १

पञ्चयज्ञविधानञ्च गृही नित्यं न हापयेत् पञ्चयज्ञविधानेन तत्पापं तस्य नश्यति २
A householder should never neglect the performance of the five sacrifices; through the performance of these five sacrifices, the sins arising from them are destroyed. २

देवयज्ञो भूतयज्ञः पितृयज्ञस्तथैव च ब्रह्मयज्ञो नृयज्ञश्च पञ्च यज्ञाः प्रकीर्तिताः ३
The five sacrifices are declared to be the sacrifice to the gods, the sacrifice to beings, the sacrifice to the ancestors, the sacrifice to Brahman, and the sacrifice to human beings. ३

होमो दैवोवलिर्भीतः पित्र्यः पिण्डक्रियास्मृतः स्वाध्यायो ब्रह्मयज्ञश्च नृयज्ञोऽतिथिपूजनम् ४
The offering into the fire is the sacrifice to the gods; the offering of food is the sacrifice to beings; the offering of the funeral rice-ball is remembered as the sacrifice to the ancestors; self-study is the sacrifice to Brahman; and honoring a guest is the sacrifice to human beings. ४

वानप्रस्थो ब्रह्मचारी यतिश्चैव तथा द्विजः गृहस्थस्य प्रसादेन जीवन्त्येते यथाविधि ५
The forest-dweller, the Brahmacārin, the ascetic, and the twice-born live properly through the support and grace of the householder. ५

गृहस्थ एव यजते गृहस्थस्तप्यते तपः दाता चैव गृहस्थः स्यात्तस्माच्छ्रेष्ठो गृहाश्रमी ६
The householder alone performs sacrifices, the householder alone practices austerity, and the householder is also the giver; therefore, the householder is superior. ६

यथा भर्ता प्रभुः स्त्रीणां वर्णानां ब्राह्मणो यथा अतिथिस्तद्वदेवास्य गृहरथस्य प्रभुः स्मृतः ७
Just as the husband is the lord of women and the Brāhmaṇa is the foremost among the varṇas, so too the guest is regarded as the lord of the householder's home. ७

न व्रतैर्नोपवासैश्च धर्मेण विविधेन च नारी स्वर्गमवाप्नोति प्राप्नोति पतिपूजनात् ८
A woman does not attain heaven through vows, fasts, or various religious observances; she attains it through honoring her husband. ८

न स्त्रानेन न होमेन नैवाग्मितर्पणात् ब्रह्मचारी दिवं याति स याति गुरुपूजनात् ९
A Brahmacārin does not attain heaven through bathing, fire offerings, or offerings to Agni; he attains it through honoring the Guru. ९

नाग्निशुश्रूषया क्षान्त्या स्त्रानेन विविधेन च वानप्रस्थो दिवं याति याति भोजनवर्जनात् १०
A forest-dweller does not attain heaven merely through serving the sacred fire, patience, or various forms of bathing; he attains it through abstaining from food. १०

न भैौर्न च मौनेन शून्यागाराश्रयेण च योगो सिद्धिमवाप्नोति यथा मैथुनवर्जनात् ११
Yoga does not attain perfection through [the prescribed practice], silence, or dwelling in an empty house as much as it does through abstaining from sexual intercourse. ११

न यज्ञैर्दक्षिणाभिश्च वह्निशुश्रूषया न च गृही स्वर्गमवाप्नोति तथा चातिथिपूजनात् १२
A householder does not attain heaven through sacrifices, sacrificial gifts, or service to the sacred fire as he does through honoring guests. १२

तस्मात् सर्वप्रयत्नेन गृहस्थोऽतिथिमागतम् आहारशयनाद्येन विधिवत्परिपूजयेत् १३
Therefore, with every effort, a householder should properly honor a guest who has arrived, with food, lodging, and other forms of hospitality. १३

सायं प्रातञ्च जुहुयादग्निहोत्रं यथाविधि दर्शश्च पौर्णमासश्च जुहुयाच्च यथाविधि १४
In the morning and evening he should perform the Agnihotra according to the prescribed rule; he should also perform the offerings on Amāvāsyā and Pūrṇimā according to the prescribed rule. १४

यज्ञैर्वा पशुबन्धैश्च चातुर्मास्यैस्तथैव च त्रैवार्षिकाधिकान्नेन पिबेत्सोममतन्द्रितः १५
Through sacrifices, animal offerings, and Cāturmāsya rites, and with food obtained in abundance over three years, he should diligently partake of Soma. १५

इष्टिं वैश्वानरीं कुर्य्यात्तथा चाल्पधनो द्विजः न भिक्षेत धनं शूद्रात्सर्वं दद्यादभीप्सितम् १६
A twice-born person of little wealth should perform the Vaiśvānara Iṣṭi; he should not beg wealth from a Śūdra, but should give whatever he desires to give. १६

वृत्तिन्तु न त्यजेद्विद्वानृत्विजं पूर्वमेव तु कर्मणा जन्मना शुद्धं विद्यात्पात्रं वलीततम् १७
The learned man should not abandon his means of livelihood; he should first recognize the ṛtvij as worthy, purified by conduct and birth, and advanced in age. १७

एतैरेव गुणैर्युक्तं धर्मार्जितधनं तथा याजयेत्तु सदा विप्रो ग्राह्यस्तस्मात् प्रतिग्रहः १८
A Brāhmaṇa endowed with these very qualities and possessing wealth acquired through dharma should always be engaged in sacrifice; therefore, accepting gifts from such a person is proper. १८

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra. 

--- Page 7 ---


षष्ठोऽध्यायः
The Sixth Chapter

अथवानप्रस्थधर्मनिरूपणं सन्यासधर्मप्रकरणञ्च
Now begins the exposition of the duties of the forest-dweller and the section concerning the duties of the renunciant.

गृहस्थस्तु यदा पश्येद्वलीपलितमात्मनः अपत्यस्यैव चापत्यं तदाऽरण्यं समाश्रयेत् १
When a householder sees wrinkles and grey hair upon himself, and sees the child of his own child, then he should resort to the forest. १

पुत्रेषु दारान्निक्षिप्य तया वाऽनुगतो वनम् अग्नीनुपचरेन्नित्यं वन्यमाहारमाहरेत् २
Having entrusted his wife to his sons, or being accompanied by her, he should go to the forest, continually tend the sacred fires, and obtain food from the forest. २

यदाहारो भवेत्तेन पूजयेत्पितृदेवताः तेनैव पूजयेन्नित्यमतिथिं समुपागतम् ३
Whatever food he obtains, with that he should worship the ancestors and the deities; with that same food he should always honour a guest who has arrived. ३

ग्रामादाहृत्य चाश्नीयादष्टौ ग्रासान्समाहितः स्वाध्यायञ्च सदा कुर्य्याज्जटाश्च विभृयात्तथा ४
Having obtained food from the village, he should eat eight mouthfuls with composure; he should always engage in Vedic study and should also wear matted locks. ४

तपसा शोषयेन्नित्यं स्वयञ्चैव कलेवरम् आर्द्रवासास्तु हेमन्ते ग्रीष्मे पञ्चतपास्तथा ५
He should continually discipline and emaciate his body through austerity. In winter he should wear wet garments, and in summer he should practise the austerity of the five fires. ५

प्रावृष्याकाशशायी स्यान्नक्ताशी च सदा भवेत् चतुर्थकालिको वास्यात्स्यात्षष्ठकालिक एव वा ६
During the rainy season he should lie under the open sky, and he should always eat only at night. He may eat at the fourth period of the day, or he may eat only at the sixth period. ६

कृच्छ्रेर्वाऽपि नयेत्कालं ब्रह्मचर्य्यञ्च पालयेत् एवं नीत्वा वने कालं द्विजो ब्रह्माश्रमी भवेत् ७
He may spend his time performing Kṛcchra austerities and should observe celibacy. Having thus spent his time in the forest, the twice-born becomes one devoted to Brahman. ७

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.



--- Page 8 ---

सप्तमोऽध्यायः
The Seventh Chapter

अथ प्राणायामलक्षणं धारणध्यानयोगनिरूपणवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the nature of prāṇāyāma and the exposition of the yoga of concentration and meditation.

कृत्वेष्टिं विधिवत्पश्चात् सर्ववेदसदक्षिणाम् आत्मन्यग्नीन्समारोप्य द्विजो ब्रह्माश्रमी भवेत् १
Having duly performed the Iṣṭi sacrifice and given the prescribed dakṣiṇā to all the Vedas, the twice-born should withdraw the sacred fires into himself and become a Brahma-āśramin. १

विधूमे न्यस्तमुसले व्यङ्गारे भुक्तवजने अतीते पादसम्पाते नित्यं भिक्षां यतिश्चरेत् २
When the smoke has ceased, the pestle has been put away, the embers have died out, the meal has been consumed, and the time for the falling of the evening footstep has passed, the ascetic should daily go out for alms. २

सनागारांश्चरेद्वैक्ष्यं भिक्षितं नानुभिक्षयेत् न व्यथेत तथाऽलाभे यथा लब्धेन वर्तयेत् नाऽऽस्वादयेत्तथैवान्नं नाश्नीयात्कस्यचिद्गहे ३
He should go begging from houses, but should not repeatedly beg for what has already been requested. He should not be distressed when he receives nothing; he should live with whatever he obtains. He should not relish the food, nor should he eat in anyone's house [in a manner contrary to the prescribed discipline]. ३

मृण्मयालावुपात्राणि यतीनान्तु विनिर्दिर्शेत् तेषां सम्मार्जनाच्छुद्धिरद्भिश्चैव प्रकीर्तिता ४
For ascetics, vessels made of clay and gourds are prescribed. Their purification is declared to be accomplished by cleaning them and by water. ४

कौपीनाच्छादनं वासो विभृयादसखश्चरन् शून्यागारनिकेतः स्याद्यत्र सायं गृहो मुनिः ५
He should wear only a loincloth and covering as clothing, wandering without companions. He should make his dwelling in an empty house, and wherever evening finds him, there the sage should regard as his dwelling. ५

दृष्टिपूतं न्यसेत्पादं वस्त्रपूतं जलं पिबेत् सत्त्यपूतां वदेद्वाचं मनःपूतं समाचरेत् ६
He should place his foot only after purifying his sight; he should drink water filtered through cloth; he should speak words purified by truth; and he should perform actions purified by the mind. ६

चन्दनैर्लिप्यतेऽङ्गं वा भस्मचूर्णैर्विगर्हितैः कल्याणमप्यकल्याणं तयोरेव न संश्रयेत् ७
He should not smear his body with sandalwood or with disapproved powders of sacred ash. Even what is auspicious may become inauspicious [through attachment to such external things]; therefore he should not rely upon either of them. ७

सर्वभूतहितो मैत्रः समलोष्ट्राश्मकाञ्चनः ध्यानयोगरतो नित्यं भिक्षुर्यायात्परां गतिम् ८
Being devoted to the welfare of all beings, friendly toward all, and regarding a clod of earth, a stone, and gold as equal, the mendicant who is constantly devoted to the yoga of meditation attains the supreme state. ८

जन्मना यस्तु निर्विण्णो मन्यते च तथैव च आधिभिर्व्याधिभिश्चैव तं देवा ब्राह्मणं विदुः ९
The gods regard as a Brāhmaṇa one who has become disenchanted with birth itself and likewise with the afflictions of the mind and the diseases of the body. ९

अशुचित्वं शरीरस्य प्रियस्य च विपर्य्ययः गर्भवासे च वसतिस्तस्मान्मुच्येत नान्यथा १०
The body is impure, what is dear is subject to change and loss, and existence in the womb is itself a state of suffering; therefore one should seek liberation from these, and not otherwise. १०

जगदेतन्निराक्रन्दं न तु सारमनर्थकम् भोक्तव्यमिति निर्विण्णो मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ११
This world is devoid of lasting substance and is ultimately futile; becoming disenchanted with the thought that it must be enjoyed, one is liberated—of this there is no doubt. ११

प्राणायामैर्दहेद्दोषान् धारणाभिश्च किल्विषम् प्रत्याहारैरसत्सङ्गान् ध्यानेनानैश्वरान्गुणान् १२
Through prāṇāyāma one should burn away the defects; through concentration, sins; through withdrawal of the senses, attachment to undesirable associations; and through meditation, the qualities that are opposed to spiritual mastery. १२

सव्याहृतिं सप्रणवां गायत्रीं शिरसा सह त्रिः पठेदायतप्राणः प्राणायामः स उच्यते १३
With the breath extended, one should recite the Gāyatrī three times, together with the seven vyāhṛtis, the Praṇava (Oṃ), and the Gāyatrī-śiras. This is called prāṇāyāma. १३

--- Page 9 ---


मनसः संयमस्तज्ज्ञैर्धारणेति निगद्यते संहारश्चेन्द्रियाणाञ्च प्रत्याहारः प्रकीर्तितः १४
The restraint of the mind is called dhāraṇā by those who understand these disciplines, and the withdrawal of the senses is known as pratyāhāra. १४

हृदयस्थस्य योगेन देवदेवस्य दर्शनम् ध्यानं प्रोक्तं प्रवक्षामि सर्वस्माद्योगतः शुभम् १५
Through yoga, one beholds the Lord of lords who dwells in the heart. This is called dhyāna, and I shall now describe this auspicious discipline, which is superior to all other forms of yoga. १५

हृदिस्था देवताः सर्वा हृदि प्राणाः प्रतिष्ठिताः हृदि ज्योतींषि भूयश्च हृदि सर्वं प्रतिष्टितम् १६
All the deities dwell in the heart; the vital breaths are established in the heart; the inner lights are also in the heart; indeed, everything is established in the heart. १६

स्वदेहमरणिं कृत्वा प्रणवञ्चोत्तरारणिम् ध्याननिर्मथनाभ्यान्तु विष्णुं पश्येद्धदिस्थितम् १७
Making one's own body the lower fire-stick and the Praṇava, Oṃ, the upper fire-stick, through the churning of meditation one should behold Viṣṇu dwelling in the heart. १७

हृद्यर्कश्चन्द्रमाः सूर्य्यः सोमो मध्ये हुताशनः तेजोमध्ये स्थितं तत्त्वं तत्त्वमध्ये स्थितोऽच्युतः १८
Within the heart are the Sun and the Moon; Soma and the solar principle are there, with the sacred fire in the midst. Within the radiance is the supreme Reality, and within that Reality is Acyuta. १८

अणोरणीयान्महतो महीयानात्मास्य जन्तोर्निहितो गुहायाम् तेजोमयं पश्यति वीतशोको धातुः प्रसादान्महिमानमात्मनः १९
The Self, smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest, is hidden in the heart of this being. One who, through the grace of the Creator, beholds that radiant Self becomes free from sorrow and perceives its greatness. १९

वासुदेवस्तमोऽन्धानां प्रत्यक्षो नैव जायते अज्ञानपटसंवीतैरिन्द्रियैर्विषयेप्सुभिः २०
Vāsudeva does not become directly manifest to those blinded by darkness, whose senses are veiled by ignorance and remain desirous of sense-objects. २०

एष वै पुरुषो विष्णुर्व्यक्ताव्यक्तः सनातनः एव धाता विधाता च पुराणो निष्कलः शिवः २१
This indeed is the Puruṣa, Viṣṇu, eternal, both manifest and unmanifest; He is the Sustainer and Ordainer, the Ancient One, indivisible and auspicious. २१

वेदाहमेतं पुरुषं महान्तमादित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् मन्त्रैर्विदित्वा न विभेति मृत्योर्नान्यः पन्थाविद्यतेऽयनाय २२
I know this great Puruṣa, radiant like the Sun and beyond darkness. Having known Him through the sacred mantras, one does not fear death; there is no other path for attaining the supreme goal. २२

पृथिव्यापस्तथा तेजोवायुराकाशमेव च पञ्चमानि विजानीयान्महाभूतानि पण्डितः २३
The wise person should know earth, water, fire, air, and space as the five great elements. २३

चक्षुः श्रोत्रे स्पर्शनञ्च रसना घ्राणमेव च बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि ज्ञानीयात्पञ्चमानि शरीरके २४
In the body, one should know the eye, ear, organ of touch, tongue, and nose as the five organs of knowledge. २४

शब्दो रूपं तथा स्पर्शो रसो गन्धस्तथैव च इन्द्रियस्थान् विजानीयात्पञ्चैव विषयान् बुधः २५
The wise person should know sound, form, touch, taste, and smell as the five objects of the senses. २५

हस्तौ पादावुपस्थञ्च जिह्वा पायुस्तथैव च कर्मेन्द्रियाणि पञ्चैव नित्यं सति शरीरके २६
The hands, feet, generative organ, tongue, and anus are the five organs of action, which always exist in the body. २६

--- Page 10 ---


मनो बुद्धिस्तथैवाऽऽत्मा व्यक्ताव्यक्तं तथैव च इन्द्रियेभ्यः पराणि ह्येतानि चत्वारि प्रवराणि च २७
Mind, intellect, the Self, and the manifest and unmanifest are the four higher principles beyond the senses. २७

चतुर्विंशत्यथैतानि तत्त्वानि कथितानि च तथाऽऽत्मानं तद्व्यतीतं पुरुषं पञ्चविंशकम् तं तु ज्ञात्वा विमुच्यन्ते ये जनाः साधुवृत्तयः २८
Thus, these twenty-four principles have been described. Beyond them is the Self, the twenty-fifth, the Puruṣa. Those people of virtuous conduct who know Him are liberated. २८

इदन्तु परमं शुद्धमेतदक्षरमुत्तमम् अशब्दरसमस्पर्शमरूपं गन्धवर्जितम् २९
This is supremely pure; this is the highest imperishable Reality, devoid of sound, taste, touch, form, and smell. २९

निर्दुःखमसुखं शुद्धं तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् अजं निरञ्जनं शान्तमव्यक्तं ध्रुवमक्षरम् अनादिनिधनं ब्रह्म तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् विज्ञानसारथिर्यस्तु मनःप्रग्रहबन्धनः ३०
That is the supreme abode of Viṣṇu, free from sorrow and pleasure, pure, unborn, stainless, peaceful, unmanifest, eternal, and imperishable. It is Brahman without beginning or end; that is the supreme abode of Viṣṇu. One whose intellect is the charioteer and whose mind is held firmly under control reaches it. ३०

सोऽध्वनः पारमाप्नोति तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् बालाग्रशतशो भागः कल्पितस्तु सहस्त्रधा ३१
Such a person reaches the far shore of the path, the supreme abode of Viṣṇu. The individual self is conceived as a hundredth part of the tip of a hair, and that part again divided a thousandfold. ३१

तस्यापि शतशो भागाज्जीवः सूक्ष्म उदाहृतः ३२
The jīva is described as even subtler, being a hundredth part of that [minute portion]. ३२

इन्द्रियेभ्यः परा ह्यर्था अर्थेभ्यश्च परं मनः मनसस्तु परा बुद्धिर्बुद्धेरात्मा तथा परः महतः परमव्यक्तमव्यक्तात्पुरुषः परः पुरुषान्नं परं किञ्चित्सा काष्ठा सा परा गतिः ३३
The objects of the senses are higher than the senses; the mind is higher than the objects; the intellect is higher than the mind; and the Self is higher than the intellect. Higher than the Great Principle is the unmanifest; higher than the unmanifest is the Puruṣa. Beyond the Puruṣa there is nothing. That is the highest limit; that is the supreme goal. ३३

एषु सर्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठत्यविरलः सदा दृश्यते त्वग्ग्रया बुध्या सूक्ष्मया सूक्ष्मदर्शिभिः ३४
He always dwells without separation within all these beings. He is perceived by those who see the subtle, through a subtle intellect that is exceedingly sharp and refined. ३४

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रे सप्तमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.


--- Page 11 ---

अष्टमोऽध्यायः
The Eighth Chapter

अथ नित्यनैमित्तिकादिस्नानानां लक्षणवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the nature of the various kinds of bathing, namely the obligatory, occasional, desired, and other forms.

नित्यं नैमित्तिकं काम्यं क्रियाङ्गं मलकर्षणम् क्रियास्नानं तथा षष्ठं षोढा स्नानं प्रकीर्तितम् १
Daily, occasional, desired, purificatory, the removal of bodily impurities, and ritual bathing—these six kinds of bathing are declared. १

अस्नातः पुनराह्नां जप्याग्निहवनादिषु प्रातःस्नानं तदर्थं च नित्यस्नानं प्रकीर्तितम् २
For one who has not bathed, the morning bath is prescribed before the daily recitation of mantras, tending of the sacred fire, offerings into the fire, and similar rites; for this purpose it is declared to be the daily bath. २

चण्डालशवयूपाद्यं स्पृष्ट्वा स्नानं रजस्वलाम् स्नानानर्हस्तु यः स्नाति स्नानं नैमित्तिकं च तत् ३
Bathing after touching a Caṇḍāla, a corpse, a sacrificial post, or a menstruating woman is prescribed as an occasional bath. When one who is otherwise not required to bathe does so on account of such an occurrence, that bath is called naimittika. ३

पुष्यस्नानादिकं स्नानं दैवज्ञविधिचोदितम् तद्धि काम्यं समुद्दिष्टं नाकामस्तत्प्रयोजयेत् ४
Baths such as the Puṣya bath, prescribed by the injunctions of astrologers and ritual authorities, are called kāmya, or desire-based, baths. One should undertake them only when there is a desired purpose, and not without such a purpose. ४

जप्तुकामः पवित्राणि अर्चिष्यन् देवताः पितॄन् स्नानं समाचरेद्यस्तु क्रियाङ्गं तत्प्रकीर्तितम् ५
One who desires to recite sacred mantras or worship the deities and ancestors should perform a bath; such a bath, undertaken as a part of a ritual, is called kriyāṅga-snāna. ५

मलापकर्षणार्थं तु स्नानमभ्यङ्गपूर्वकम् मलापकर्षणार्थाय प्रवृत्तिस्तस्य नान्यथा ६
Bathing preceded by an oil massage for the purpose of removing bodily impurities is called bathing for the removal of impurities. Its purpose is solely the removal of such impurities. ६

सरित्सु देवखातेषु तीर्थेषु च नदीषु च क्रियास्नानं समुद्दिष्टं स्नानं तत्र महाक्रिया ७
Bathing as a ritual is prescribed in streams, sacred excavated pools, tīrthas, and rivers; bathing in such places is regarded as a great religious act. ७

तत्र काम्यं तु कर्तव्यं यथावद्विधिचोदितम् नित्यं नैमित्तिकं चैव क्रियाङ्गं मलकर्षणम् ८
There, a desired bath should be performed according to the prescribed injunction. The daily, occasional, ritual, and impurity-removing baths should likewise be performed as prescribed. ८

तीर्थाभावे तु कर्तव्यमुष्णोदकपरोदकैः स्नानं तु वह्नितप्तेन तथैव परवारिणा ९
When a tīrtha is unavailable, bathing should be performed with warm water or with water heated by fire, and likewise with water obtained from another suitable source. ९

शरीरशुद्धिर्विज्ञेया न तु स्नानफलं लभेत् अद्भिर्गात्राणि शुध्यन्ति तीर्थस्नानात्फलं लभेत् १०
This should be understood as purification of the body, but it does not produce the full fruit of bathing at a tīrtha. The limbs are purified by ordinary water, whereas the religious merit is obtained through bathing at a sacred tīrtha. १०

सरःसु देवखातेषु तीर्थेषु च नदीषु च स्नानमेव क्रिया तस्मात्स्नानात्पुण्यफलं स्मृतम् ११
Bathing in lakes, sacred excavated pools, tīrthas, and rivers is itself a religious act; therefore bathing in such places is said to produce religious merit. ११

तीर्थं प्राप्यानुषङ्गेण स्नानं तीर्थे समाचरेत् स्नानजं फलमाप्नोति तीर्थयात्राफलं न तु १२
Having reached a tīrtha incidentally, one should bathe there. One obtains the fruit arising from the bath, but not the full fruit of undertaking a pilgrimage to the tīrtha. १२

सर्वतीर्थानि पुण्यानि पापघ्नानि सदा नृणाम् परस्परानपेक्षाणि कथितानि मनीषिभिः १३
All tīrthas are sacred and always destroy the sins of people. The wise have declared that each tīrtha possesses its merit independently of the others. १३

सर्वे प्रस्रवणाः पुण्याः सरांसि च शिलोच्चयाः नद्यः पुण्यास्तथा सर्वा जाह्नवी तु विशेषतः १४
All springs are sacred, as are lakes and mountains. All rivers are likewise sacred, and the Jāhnavī, the Ganges, is especially so. १४

यस्य पादौ च हस्तौ च मनश्चैव सुसंयतम् विद्या तपश्च कीर्तिश्च स तीर्थफलमश्नुते १५
One whose feet, hands, and mind are well controlled, and who possesses learning, austerity, and good reputation, obtains the fruit of a tīrtha. १५

नृणां पापकृतां तीर्थे पापस्य शमनं भवेत् यथोक्तफलदं तीर्थं भवेच्छुद्धात्मनां नृणाम् १६
For people who have committed sins, bathing at a tīrtha brings about the pacification of those sins. For people of purified minds, a tīrtha bestows the fruits that have been prescribed for it. १६

इति शाङ्खीये धर्मशास्त्रेऽष्टमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of the Śāṅkhīya Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 12 ---


क्रियास्नानं प्रवक्ष्यामि यथावद्विधिपूर्वकम् मृद्भिरद्भिश्च कर्तव्यं शौचमादौ यथाविधि १
I shall now describe the ritual bath according to the prescribed procedure. First, purification should be performed properly with earth and water.

जले निमग्न उन्मज्य उपस्पृश्य यथाविधि जलस्याऽऽवाहनं कुर्यात्तत्प्रवक्ष्याम्यतः परम् तीर्थस्यावाहनं कुर्य्यात्तत्प्रवक्ष्याम्यशेषतः २
Having immersed himself in the water, he should rise and perform the prescribed purification by touching the water. He should invoke the waters; I shall now explain this. Thereafter, he should invoke the sacred pilgrimage waters, which I shall explain completely.

प्रपद्ये वरुणं देवमम्भसां पतिमूर्जितम् याचितं देहि मे तीर्थं सर्वपापापनुत्तये ३
I seek refuge in the powerful god Varuṇa, the lord of the waters. Grant me the sacred waters that I seek, for the removal of all sins.

तीर्थमावाहयिष्यामि सर्वाघविनिषूदनम् सान्निध्यमस्मिन् स्तोये च किर्यतां मदनुग्रहात् ४
I shall invoke the sacred waters, which destroy all sins. By your grace, may your presence be established in this water.

रुद्रान्प्रपद्ये वरदान् सर्वानप्सु पदस्तथा सर्वानप्सु सदश्चैव प्रपद्ये प्रयतः स्थितः ५
I seek refuge in all the Rudras, the bestowers of boons, who are established in the waters; I also seek refuge in all that abides within the waters, remaining here with purity and devotion.

देवमंशुमदं वह्नि प्रपद्येऽघनिषूदनम् आपः पुण्या पवित्राश्च प्रपद्ये शरणं तथा ६
I seek refuge in the radiant god Agni, the destroyer of sins. I likewise seek refuge in the waters, which are sacred and purifying.

रुद्राश्चाग्निश्च सर्पश्च वरुणस्त्वाप एव च शमयन्त्वाशु म पापं माञ्च रक्षन्तु सर्वशः ७
May the Rudras, Agni, the Serpent, Varuṇa, and the waters quickly remove my sins and protect me from every side.

इत्येवमुक्त्वा कर्तव्यस्ततः संमार्जनं जले आपो हिष्ठेति तिसृभिर्यथावदनुपूर्वशः ८
Having thus recited these words, one should then perform the ritual sprinkling and purification in the water, properly and in due sequence, with the three verses beginning with “Āpo hi ṣṭhā.”

--- Page 13 ---

हिरण्यवर्णेति तिसृभिर्जगतीति चतसृभिः शं नो देवीति तथा शं न आपस्तथैव च ९
With the three verses beginning with “Hiraṇyavarṇā,” the four verses beginning with “Jagatī,” and likewise with the verses beginning with “Śaṃ no devī” and “Śaṃ na āpaḥ,” he should perform the prescribed purification.

इदमापः प्रवहते तथा मन्त्रमुदीरयेत् एवं सम्मार्जनं कृत्वा च्छन्दआर्षञ्च देवताः १०
He should also recite the mantra beginning with “Idam āpaḥ pravahate.” Having thus performed the ritual purification, he should [recognize and recite] the prescribed metres, ṛṣis, and deities.

एवं मन्त्रान्समुच्चार्य च्छन्दांसि ऋषिदेवताः अघमर्षणसूक्तञ्च प्रपठेत् प्रयतः सदा
Having thus recited the mantras, together with their metres, ṛṣis, and deities, he should always recite the Aghamarṣaṇa Sūkta with disciplined attention.

छन्दोऽनुष्टुप् च तस्यैव ऋषिश्चैवाघमर्षणः देवता भाववृत्तश्च पापक्षये प्रकीर्तितः ११
Its metre is Anuṣṭubh, its ṛṣi is Aghamarṣaṇa, and its deity is Bhāvavṛtta; it is declared to be for the destruction of sins. ११

ततोऽम्भसि निमग्नः स्यात्त्रिः पठेदघमर्षणम् प्रपद्यान्मूर्द्धनि तथा महाव्याहृतिभिर्जलम् १२
Thereafter, having immersed himself in the water, he should recite the Aghamarṣaṇa three times and should pour water upon his head with the Mahāvyāhṛtis. १२

यथाश्वमेधः क्रतुराट् सर्वपापापनोदनः तथाऽघमर्षणं सूक्तं सर्वपापप्रणाशनम् १३
Just as the Aśvamedha, the foremost of sacrifices, removes all sins, so too does the Aghamarṣaṇa Sūkta destroy all sins. १३

अनेन विधिना स्नात्वा स्नातवान् धौतवाससा परिवर्जितवासास्तु तीर्थनामानि संजपेत् १४
Having bathed according to this procedure and put on clean, washed clothing, he should recite the names of the sacred tīrthas while avoiding impure or previously worn garments. १४

उदकस्याप्रदानात्तु स्नानशाटीं न पीडयेत् अनेन विधिना स्नातस्तीर्थस्य फलमश्नुते १५
He should not wring out the bathing cloth so as to deprive the water of its proper offering. One who bathes according to this procedure obtains the fruit of bathing at a sacred tīrtha. १५

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे नवमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the Śāṅga Dharmaśāstra.

अथ दशमोऽध्यायः
Now begins the Tenth Chapter.

अथाचमनविधिवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the procedure of ācamana.

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि शुभामाचननक्रियाम् कायं कनिष्ठिकामूले तीर्थमुक्तं मनीषिभिः १
I shall now describe the auspicious rite of ācamana. The place at the base of the little finger is declared by the wise to be the Kāya tīrtha. १

अङ्गुष्ठमूले च तथा प्राजापत्यं विचक्षणैः अङ्गुल्यग्रे स्मृतं दिव्यं पित्र्यं तर्जनिमूलकम् २
The base of the thumb is called the Prājāpatya tīrtha by the discerning; the tips of the fingers are remembered as the Divine tīrtha, and the base of the index finger as the Pitṛ tīrtha. २

प्राजापत्येन तीर्थेन त्रिः प्राश्नीयाजलं द्विजः द्विः प्रमृज्य मुखं पश्चाद्वान्यद्भिः समुपस्पृशेत् ३
The twice-born should sip water three times using the Prājāpatya tīrtha, then wipe the mouth twice, and afterward touch [the prescribed parts of the body] with the remaining water. ३

--- Page 14 ---

हृद्गाभिः पूयते विप्रः कण्ठगाभिस्तु भूमिपः तालुगाभिस्तथा वैश्यः शूद्रः स्पृष्टाभिरन्ततः ४
A Brahmana is purified by water reaching the heart, a Kshatriya by water reaching the throat, a Vaishya by water reaching the palate, and a Shudra by merely touching the body with water.

अन्तजार्नुः शुचौ देशे प्राङ्गखः सुसमाहितः उदङ्गखो वा प्रयतो दिशश्चानवलोकयम् ५
Sitting in a clean place with the knees within the body, one should remain attentive, facing east or north, without looking toward the other directions.

अद्भिः समुद्धताभिस्तु हीनाभिः फेनबुद्बुदैः वह्निना चाप्यतपाभिरक्षाराभिरुपस्पृशेत् ६
One should perform the touching with water that is free from foam and bubbles, properly drawn up, neither too little nor too hot, and free from alkaline impurities.

तर्जन्यङ्गुष्ठयोगेन स्पृशेन्नासापुटद्वयम् अङ्गुष्ठमव्यायोगेन स्पृशेन्नत्रद्वयं ततः ७
With the index finger and thumb together, one should touch both nostrils; then, using the thumbs, one should touch both eyes.

अङ्गुष्ठानामिकाभ्यां तु श्रवणौ समुपस्पृशेत् कनिष्ठाङ्गुष्ठयोगेन स्पृशेत्स्कन्धद्वयं ततः ८
With the thumbs and ring fingers, one should touch both ears; then, with the little fingers and thumbs together, one should touch both shoulders.

सर्वासामेव योगेन नाभिं च हृदयं तथा संस्पृशेच्च तथा मूर्ध्नि एष आचमने विधिः ९
Using all the fingers together, one should touch the navel and the heart, and likewise touch the head. This is the prescribed procedure for ācamana.

त्रिः प्राश्नीयाद्यदम्भस्तु प्रीतास्तेनास्य देवताः ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च रुद्रश्च भवन्तीत्यनुशुश्रुम १०
Whatever water is sipped three times, by that the deities are pleased; Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra become pleased with him, so we have heard.

गङ्गा च यमुना चैव प्रीयेते परिमार्जनात् नासत्यदस्त्रौ प्रीयेते स्पृष्टे नासापुटद्वये ११
Ganga and Yamuna are pleased by the cleansing; the Nasatyas, the divine Ashvins, are pleased when both nostrils are touched.

स्पृष्टे लोचनयुग्मे तु प्रीयेते शशिभास्करौ कर्णयुग्मे तथा स्पृष्टे प्रीयेते अनिलानलौ १२
When both eyes are touched, the Moon and the Sun are pleased; when both ears are touched, Vayu and Agni are pleased.

स्कन्धयाः स्पर्शनादश्य प्रीयन्ते सर्वदेवताः मूर्ध्नः संस्पर्शनादस्य प्रीतस्तु पुरुषो भवेत् १३
By touching the shoulders, all the deities are pleased; by touching the head, the Supreme Person becomes pleased.

विना यज्ञोपवीतेन तथा मुक्तशिखो द्विजः अप्रक्षालितपादस्तु आचान्तोऽप्यशुचिर्भवेत् १४
A twice-born person who performs ācamana without the sacred thread, with the hair tuft loosened, or without washing the feet remains impure even after performing ācamana.

बहिर्जानुरुपस्पृश्य एकहस्तार्पितैर्जलैः सोपानत्कस्तथा तिष्ठन्नैव शुद्धिमवाप्नुयात् १५
One does not attain purification by touching the outside of the knee, by using water held in only one hand, or by remaining standing while wearing footwear.

आचम्य च पुराप्रोक्तं तीर्थसंमार्जनं तु यत् उपस्पृशेत्ततः पश्चान्मत्रेणानेन धर्मतः १६
After performing ācamana, one should perform the previously prescribed cleansing of the sacred waters, and then, in accordance with the proper rule, touch the body with the following mantra.

--- Page 15 ---

अन्तश्चरति भूतेषु गुहायां विश्वतोमुखः त्वं यज्ञस्त्वं वषट्कार आपो ज्योती रसोऽमृतम् १७
He moves within all beings, dwelling in the secret heart, with faces turned in every direction. You are the sacrifice, you are the Vaṣaṭ-call; you are the waters, light, essence, and immortality.

आचम्य च ततः पश्चादादित्याभिमुखो जलम् उदु त्यं जातवेदसमिति मन्त्रेण निक्षिपेत् १८
After performing ācamana, one should then face the Sun and offer water while reciting the mantra beginning with “Udu tyaṃ Jātavedasam.”

एष एव विधिः प्रोक्तः संध्ययोश्च द्विजातिषु पूर्वां संध्यां जपंस्तिष्ठेदासीनः पश्चिमांस्तथा १९
This very procedure is prescribed for the two Sandhyās of the twice-born. During the morning Sandhyā, one should remain standing while reciting the prayers, and during the evening Sandhyā, one should remain seated.

ततो जपेत्पवित्राणि पवित्रं वाऽथ शक्तितः ऋषयो दीर्घसंध्यत्वाद्दीर्घमायुरवाप्नुयुः २०
Thereafter, one should recite the purifying hymns, or, according to one's capacity, the Pavitram hymn. The Ṛṣis attained long life by observing the Sandhyā for a long duration.

सर्ववेदपवित्राणि वक्ष्याम्यहमतः परम् येषां जपैश्च होमैश्च पूयन्ते मानवाः सदा २१
I shall now describe the purifying passages of all the Vedas, by the recitation and offering into the fire of which human beings are always purified.

इति शाङ्ख धर्मशास्त्रे दशमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.


अथ एकादशोऽध्यायः 
thus begins 11th chapter 

अथाघमर्षणविधिवर्णनम्

अघमर्षणं देवकृतं शुद्धवत्यस्तरत्समाः कूष्माण्ड्यः पावमान्यश्च सावित्र्यश्च तथैव च १
The Aghamarṣaṇa, Devakṛta, Śuddhavatī, Ataratsamā, Kūṣmāṇḍa, Pāvamāna, and Sāvitrī hymns are likewise [purifying recitations].

त्र्यभिष्टुं द्रुपदा चैव स्तोमानि व्याहृतिस्तथा भारुण्डानि च सामानि गायत्री चौशनं तथा २
The Tryabhiṣṭu, Drupadā, Stomas, Vyāhṛtis, Bhāruṇḍa Sāman hymns, Gāyatrī, and Auśana are also [purifying].

पुरुषव्रतं च भाषं च तथा सोमव्रतानि च अब्लिङ्गं बार्हस्पत्यं च वाक्सूत्रममृतं तथा ३
The Puruṣavrata, Bhāṣa, Somavrata hymns, Abliṅga, Bārhaspatya, Vāk-sūtra, and Amṛta are likewise [purifying].

शतरुद्रीयमथर्वशिरस्त्रिसुपर्णं महाव्रतम् गे सूक्तमश्वसूक्तं च इन्द्रसूक्तं च सामनी ४
The Śatarudrīya, Atharvaśiras, Trisuparṇa, Mahāvrata, Go-sūkta, Aśva-sūkta, and Indra-sūkta Sāman hymns are also [purifying].

त्रीण्याज्यदोहानि रथंतरं च अग्निव्रतं वामदेवव्रतं च एतानि गीतानि पुनन्तिजन्तूञ्जातिस्मरत्वं लभते यदीच्छेत् ५
The three Ājyadohas, Rathantara, Agnivrata, and Vāmadevavrata are also among these sacred chants. These hymns purify beings, and one who desires it may attain remembrance of previous births.

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे एकादशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 16 ---

द्वादशोऽध्यायः
The twelfth chapter.

अथ गायत्रीजपविधिवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the procedure for the recitation of the Gāyatrī.

इति वेदपवित्राण्यभिहितानि एभ्यः सावित्री विशिष्यते १
Thus have the purifying passages of the Veda been described; among these, the Sāvitrī is especially distinguished.

नास्त्यघमर्षणात्परमन्तर्जले २
There is nothing superior to the Aghamarṣaṇa while standing in the waters.

न सावित्र्या समं जप्यं न व्याहृतिसमं हुतम् ३
There is no recitation equal to the Sāvitrī, nor is there any oblation equal to the Vyāhṛtis.

कुशमय्यामासीनः कुशोत्तरीयवान्कुशपवित्रपाणिः प्राङ्गुखः सूर्याभिमुखो वाऽक्षमालामुपादाय देवताध्यायी जपं कुर्यात् ४
Seated upon a seat made of kuśa grass, wearing a kuśa garment and holding a kuśa ring on the hand, one should face east or face the Sun, take up a rosary, meditate upon the deity, and perform the recitation.

सुवर्णमणिभुक्तास्फटिकपद्माक्षरुद्राक्षपुत्रजीवकानामन्यतमेनाऽऽदाय मालां कुर्यात् ५
One should make a rosary using any one of the following: gold, gems, pearls, crystal, lotus seeds, Rudrākṣa, or Putrajīvaka seeds.

कुशग्रन्थिं कृत्वा वामहस्तोपयमैर्वा गणयेत् ६
Having made a knot of kuśa grass, one should count the recitations with the fingers of the left hand.

आदौ देवता ऋषिच्छन्दः स्मरेत् ७
At the beginning, one should remember the deity, Ṛṣi, and metre.

ततः सप्रणवां सव्याहृतिकामादावन्ते च शिरसा गायत्रीमावर्तयेत् ८
Thereafter, one should recite the Gāyatrī together with the Praṇava and Vyāhṛtis, and with the Śiras at the beginning and the end.

अथास्याः सविता देवता ऋषिविश्वामित्रो गायत्री छन्दः ९
For this [Gāyatrī], Savitṛ is the deity, Viśvāmitra is the Ṛṣi, and Gāyatrī is the metre.

ॐकारः प्रणवाख्यः १०
The syllable Oṃ is known as the Praṇava.

ॐभूः ॐभुवः ॐ स्वः ॐ महः ॐ जनः ॐतपः ॐसत्यमिति व्याहृतयः ११
Oṃ Bhūḥ, Oṃ Bhuvaḥ, Oṃ Svaḥ, Oṃ Mahaḥ, Oṃ Janaḥ, Oṃ Tapaḥ, Oṃ Satyam—these are the Vyāhṛtis.

ओमापो ज्योतीरसोऽमृतं ब्रह्म भूर्भुवः स्वरोमिति शिरः १२
Oṃ, waters, light, essence, immortality, Brahman, Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ, Oṃ—this is the Śiras.

भवन्ति चात्र श्लोकाः १३
Here, moreover, there are the following verses.

सव्याहृतिकां सप्रणवां गायत्रीं शिरसा सह ये जपन्ति सदा तेषां न भयं विद्यते क्वचित् १४
Those who always recite the Gāyatrī together with the Praṇava, the Vyāhṛtis, and the Śiras have no fear whatsoever.

शतं जप्त्वा तु सा देवी दिनपापप्रणाशिनी सहस्रं जप्त्वा तु तथा पातकेभ्यः समुद्धरेत् १५
Having recited that divine mantra one hundred times, the sins committed during the day are destroyed; having recited it one thousand times, it delivers one from sins.

दशसहस्रं जप्त्वा तु सर्वकल्मषनाशिनी सुवर्णस्तेयकृद्विप्रो ब्रह्महा गुरुतल्पगः १६
Having recited it ten thousand times, it destroys all impurities. A Brāhmaṇa who has stolen gold, killed a Brāhmaṇa, or violated the bed of his guru [is purified by it].

सुरापश्च विशुध्येत लक्षजाप्यान्न संशयः प्राणायामत्रयं कृत्वा स्नानकाले समाहितः १७
Even one who has drunk intoxicating liquor is purified by one hundred thousand recitations; of this there is no doubt. Having performed three prāṇāyāmas, one should remain composed at the time of bathing.

अहोरात्रकृतात्पापात्तत्क्षणादेव मुच्यते सव्याहृतिकाः सप्रणवाः प्राणायामास्तु षोडश १८
One is freed at once from sins committed during the day and night. Sixteen prāṇāyāmas should be performed together with the Vyāhṛtis and the Praṇava.

अपि भ्रूणहनं मासात्पुनन्त्यहरहः कृताः हुता देवी विशेषेण सर्वकामप्रदायिनी १९
Even one who has slain a fetus is purified by performing these [recitations] daily for a month. When offered in the fire, the Goddess especially becomes the bestower of all desires.

--- Page 17 ---


सर्वपापक्षयकरी वरदा भक्तवत्सला शान्तिकामस्तु जुहुयात्सावित्रीमक्षतैः शुचिः २०
She destroys all sins, grants boons, and is affectionate toward her devotees. One who desires peace, being pure, should offer oblations to Sāvitrī with unbroken rice grains.

हन्तुकामोऽपमृत्युं च घृतेन जुहुयात्तथा श्रीकामस्तु तथा पद्यैर्बिल्वैः काञ्चनकामुकः २१
One who desires to ward off untimely death should likewise offer oblations with ghee; one who desires prosperity should offer lotuses, and one who desires gold should offer bilva leaves.

ब्रह्मवर्चसकामस्तु पयसा जुहुयात्तथा घृतप्लुतैस्तिलैर्वहिं जुहुयात्सुसमाहितः २२
One who desires spiritual radiance should offer oblations with milk; likewise, being fully composed, one should offer sesame seeds soaked in ghee into the fire.

गायत्र्ययुतहोमाच्च सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते पापात्मा लक्षहोमेन पातकेभ्यः प्रमुच्यते २३
By performing ten thousand oblations with the Gāyatrī, one is freed from all sins; a sinful person is freed from grave transgressions by performing one hundred thousand oblations.

अभीष्टं लोकमाप्नोति प्राप्नुयात्काममीप्सितम् गायत्री वेदजननी गायत्री पापनाशिनी २४
One attains the desired realm and obtains the wish one longs for. Gāyatrī is the mother of the Vedas; Gāyatrī is the destroyer of sins.

गायत्र्या परमं नास्ति दिवि चेह च पावनम् हस्तत्राणप्रदा देवी पततां नरकार्णवे २५
There is nothing more purifying than the Gāyatrī, either in heaven or here on earth. The Goddess extends her hand to protect those who are falling into the ocean of hell.

तस्मात्तामभ्यसेन्नित्यं ब्राह्मणो नियतः शुचिः गायत्रीजाप्यनिरतं हव्यकव्येषु भोजयेत् २६
Therefore, a Brāhmaṇa who is disciplined and pure should practise it daily. One should feed at offerings made to the gods and ancestors a person devoted to the recitation of the Gāyatrī.

तस्मिन्न तिष्ठते पापमब्बिन्दुरिव पुष्करे २७
Sin does not remain in such a person, just as a drop of water does not remain upon a lotus.

जपेनैव तु संसिध्येद्ब्राह्मणो नात्र संशयः कुर्यादन्यन्न वा कुर्यान्मैत्रो ब्राह्मण उच्यते २८
A Brāhmaṇa attains perfection through recitation alone; of this there is no doubt. Whether he performs other acts or not, one who is friendly toward all is called a Brāhmaṇa.

उपांशु स्याच्छतगुणः साहस्रो मानसः स्मृतः नोच्चैर्जपं बुधः कुर्यासावित्र्यास्तु विशेषतः २९
Whispered recitation is said to be a hundred times more efficacious, while mental recitation is said to be a thousand times more efficacious. A wise person should especially not recite the Sāvitrī aloud.

सावित्रीजाप्यनिरतः स्वर्गमाप्नोति मानवः गायत्रीजप्यनिरतो मोक्षोपायं च विन्दति ३०
A person devoted to the recitation of the Sāvitrī attains heaven; one devoted to the recitation of the Gāyatrī finds the means to liberation.

तस्मात्सर्वप्रयत्नेन स्त्रातः प्रयतमानसः गायत्रीं तु जपेद्भक्त्या सर्वपापप्रणाशिनीम् ३१
Therefore, having bathed and with a disciplined mind, one should, with every effort and devotion, recite the Gāyatrī, the destroyer of all sins.

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे द्वादशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the twelfth chapter of the Śāṅga Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 18 ---

त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः
The thirteenth chapter.

अथ तर्पणविधिवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the procedure for Tarpana, the offering of water.

स्त्रातः कृतजप्यस्तदनु प्राङ्गखो दिव्येन तीर्थेन देवानुदकेन तर्पयेत् १
Having bathed and completed the recitation, one should then face east and offer water to the gods with the divine sacred water.

अथ तर्पणविधिः २
Now, the procedure of Tarpana.

ॐ भगवन्तं शेषं तर्पयामि ३
Om, I offer Tarpana to the venerable Śeṣa.

कालाग्निरुद्रं तु ततो रुक्मभौमं तथैव च श्वेतभौमं ततः प्रोक्तं पातालानां च सप्तकम् ४
Then, one should offer Tarpana to Kālāgnirudra, then to Rukmabhauma and likewise to Śvetabhauma; thereafter, the seven Pātālas are mentioned.

जम्बूद्वीपं ततः प्रोक्तं शाकद्वीपं ततः परम् गोमेदपुष्करे तद्वच्छाकाख्यं च ततः परम् ५
Then Jambūdvīpa is mentioned, followed by Śākadvīpa, and thereafter Gomeda and Puṣkara, and then the region known as Śāka.

शार्वरं ततः स्वधामानं ततो हिरण्यरोमाणं ततः कल्पस्थायिनो लोकांस्तर्पयेत् ६
Then one should offer Tarpana to Śārvara, thereafter to Svadhāma, then to Hiraṇyaroma, and then to the worlds whose inhabitants remain throughout the Kalpa.

लवणोदकं ततः क्षीरोदं ततो घृतोदं तत इचूदं ततः स्वादूदं तत इति सप्तसमुद्रकं प्रत्यृचं पुरुषसूक्तेनोदकाञ्जलीन्दद्यात् पुष्पाणि च तथा भक्त्या ७
Then [one should offer Tarpana to] the Salt Ocean, the Ocean of Milk, the Ocean of Ghee, the Ocean of Sugarcane Juice, and the Ocean of Sweet Water; thus, to the seven oceans, one should offer handfuls of water with each verse of the Puruṣasūkta, and likewise offer flowers with devotion.

अथ कृतापसव्योदक्षिणामुखोऽन्तर्जानुः पित्र्येण पितृणां यथाश्राद्धं प्रकाममुदकं दद्यात् ८
Then, having placed the sacred thread in the apasavya position, facing south and with the right knee touching the ground, one should offer abundant water to the ancestors through the ancestral method, according to the manner prescribed for Śrāddha.

सौवर्णेन पात्रेण राजतेनौदुम्बरेण खड्गपात्रेणान्य पात्रेण वोदकं पितृतीर्थं स्पृशन्दद्यात् ९
One should offer the water using a golden, silver, audumbara, khadga, or other suitable vessel, touching the pitṛ-tīrtha [the part of the hand sacred to the ancestors].

पित्रे पिता-महाय प्रपितामहाय मात्रे पितामह्ये प्रपितामह्यं मातामहाय प्रमातः महाय मात्रे मातामह्ये प्रमातामह्ये सप्तमात्पुरुषात्पितृपक्षे यावतां नाम जानीयात्पितृपक्षाणां तर्पणं कृत्वा गुरूणां मातृपक्षाणां तर्पणं कुर्यात् १०
One should offer Tarpana to the father, grandfather, great-grandfather; to the mother, grandmother, great-grandmother; to the maternal grandfather and great-grandfather; to the maternal grandmother and great-grandmother; and, extending to the seventh generation, to as many ancestors of the paternal line as one knows by name. Having performed Tarpana for the paternal ancestors, one should then perform Tarpana for one's teachers and for the ancestors of the maternal line.

मातृपक्षाणां तर्पणं कृत्वा संबन्धिबान्धवानां कुर्यात् तेषां कृत्वा सुहृदां कुर्यात् ११
Having performed Tarpana for the maternal ancestors, one should perform it for relatives and kinsmen; having done so, one should perform it for friends.

भवन्ति चात्र श्लोकाः १२
Here, moreover, there are the following verses.

विना रौप्यसुवर्णेन विना ताम्रतिलेन च विना दर्भेश्च मन्त्रैश्च पितृणां नोपतिष्ठते १३
Without silver or gold, without copper and sesame seeds, and without kuśa grass and mantras, the offering does not reach the ancestors.

सौवर्णराजताभ्यां च खड्गेनौदुम्बरेण च दत्तमक्षय्यतां याति पितृणां तु तिलोदकम् १४
When sesame water is offered to the ancestors using vessels of gold or silver, or a khadga or audumbara vessel, the offering becomes imperishable.

--- Page 19 ---

हेम्ना तु सह यद्दत्तं क्षीरेण मधुना सह तदप्यक्षय्यतां याति पितृणां तु तिलोदकम् १५
Whatever sesame water is offered together with gold, milk, and honey also becomes imperishable for the ancestors.

कुर्यादहरहः श्राद्धमन्नाद्येनोदकेन वा पयोमूलफलैर्वाऽपि पितॄणां प्रीतिमाहवन् १६
One should perform Śrāddha every day with food and other provisions, or with water, or even with milk, roots, and fruits, thereby bringing satisfaction to the ancestors.

स्त्रातः संतर्पणं कृत्वा पितृणां तु तिलाम्भसा पितृयज्ञमवाप्नोति प्रीणाति च पितृस्तथा १७
Having bathed and performed Tarpana for the ancestors with water containing sesame seeds, one obtains the merit of the Pitṛ-yajña and thereby pleases the ancestors.

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Śāṅga Dharmaśāstra.

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्यायः
Now, the fourteenth chapter.

अथ श्राद्धे ब्राह्मणपरीक्षावर्णनम्
Now, the description of the examination of Brāhmaṇas for Śrāddha.

ब्राह्मणान्न परीक्षेत दैवे कर्मणि धर्मवित् पित्र्ये कर्मणि संप्राप्ते युक्तमाहः परीक्षणम् १
A knower of Dharma should not examine Brāhmaṇas for a divine rite; but when the ancestral rite has arrived, the texts prescribe that their qualifications should properly be examined.

ब्राह्मणा ये विकर्मस्था बैडालव्रतिकास्तथा ऊनाङ्गा अतिरिक्ताङ्गा ब्राह्मणाः पङ्गिदूषकाः २
Those Brāhmaṇas who engage in improper acts, those who observe the hypocritical vow of a cat, those who have deficient limbs, and those who have excessive limbs are considered to defile the assembly.

गुरूणां प्रतिकूलाश्च वेदाग्नयुत्सादिनश्च ये गुरूणां त्यागिनश्चैव ब्राह्मणाः पङ्गिदूषकाः ३
Those who oppose their teachers, those who abandon the Vedic fires, and those who abandon or forsake their teachers are Brāhmaṇas who defile the assembly.

अनध्यायेष्वधीयानाः शौचाचारविवर्जिताः शूद्रान्नरससंपुष्टा ब्राह्मणा पङ्गिदूषकाः ४
Those who study during prohibited periods, those who are devoid of cleanliness and proper conduct, and those nourished by food prepared by Śūdras are Brāhmaṇas who defile the assembly.

षडङ्गवित्त्रिसुपर्णो बह्वचो ज्येष्ठसामगः त्रिणाचिकेतः पञ्चाग्निर्बाह्मणाः पङ्गिपावनाः ५
Those Brāhmaṇas who know the six Vedāṅgas, those who know the Trisuparṇa, those learned in the Ṛgveda, those who are foremost among Sāmavedins, those versed in the three Nāciketa rites, and those who maintain the five fires are purifiers of the assembly.

ब्रह्मदेयानुसंतानो ब्रह्मदेयाप्रदायकः ब्रह्मदेयापतिर्यश्च ब्राह्मणाः पङ्गि पावनाः ६
Those Brāhmaṇas who belong to a lineage that has received a Brahmadeya, those who bestow a Brahmadeya, and those who are masters of a Brahmadeya are purifiers of the assembly.

ऋग्यजुःपारगो यश्च साम्नां यश्चापि पारगः अथर्वाङ्गिरसोऽध्येता ब्राह्मणः पङ्गिपावनः ७
A Brāhmaṇa who has mastered the Ṛgveda and Yajurveda, one who has mastered the Sāmaveda, and one who studies the Atharvāṅgirasa is a purifier of the assembly.

नित्यं योगरतो विद्वान्समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः ध्यानशीलो यतिर्विद्वान्ब्राह्मणः पङ्गिपावनः ८
A learned Brāhmaṇa who is constantly devoted to Yoga, regards clods of earth, stones, and gold alike, is devoted to meditation, and lives as an ascetic is a purifier of the assembly.

--- Page 20 ---


द्वौदैवे प्राङ्गखौ त्रीन्वा पित्र्ये चोदङ्गखांस्तथा भोजयेद्विविधान्विप्रानेकैकमुभयत्र वा ९
For the divine rite, one should feed two or three Brāhmaṇas facing east; for the ancestral rite, three or more facing north, or one Brāhmaṇa for each of the two rites.

भोजयेदथवाऽप्येकं ब्राह्मणं पङ्गिपावनम् दैवे कृत्वा तु नैवेद्यं पश्चाद्वह्नौ तु तत्क्षिपेत् १०
Alternatively, one may feed a single Brāhmaṇa who is a purifier of the assembly. After making the offering to the divine rite, one should then place that offering into the fire.

उच्छिष्टसंनिधौ कार्यं पिण्डनिर्वपणं बुधैः अभावे च तथाकार्यमग्निकार्यं यथाविधि ११
The wise should perform the offering of the ancestral rice-balls in the presence of the remnants of the meal; in their absence, the fire-offering should likewise be performed according to the prescribed procedure.

श्राद्धं कृत्वा प्रयत्नेन त्वराक्रोधविवर्जितः उष्णमन्नं द्विजातिभ्यः श्रद्धया विनिवेदयेत् १२
Having performed the Śrāddha carefully, without haste or anger, one should respectfully serve hot food to the twice-born.

अन्यत्र पुष्पमूलेभ्यः पीठकेभ्यश्च पण्डितः भोजयेद्विविधान्विप्रान्गन्धमाल्यसमुज्ज्वलान् १३
Except upon flowers, roots, and low seats, the learned person should feed various Brāhmaṇas, adorned with fragrant substances and garlands.

यत्किंचित्पच्यते गेहे भक्ष्यं वा भोज्यमेव वा अनिवेद्य न भोक्तव्यं पिण्डमूले कदाचन १४
Whatever is cooked in the household, whether something to be eaten or a meal, should not be consumed without first offering it; and one should never eat at the place where the rice-balls are prepared or offered.

उग्रगन्धान्यगन्धानि चैत्यवृक्षभवानि च पुष्पाणि वर्जनीयानि रक्तवर्णानि यानि च १५
Flowers having strong or unpleasant odours, those growing on sacred trees, and those that are red in colour should be avoided.

तोयोद्भवानि देयानि रक्तान्यपि विशेषतः ऊर्णासूत्रं प्रदातव्यं कार्पासमथवा नवम् १६
Aquatic flowers may be offered, especially red ones. Woollen thread should be offered, or alternatively new cotton thread.

दशां विवर्जयेत्प्राज्ञो यद्यप्यहतवस्त्रजाम् घृतेन दीपो दातव्यस्तिलतैलेन वा पुनः १७
The wise should avoid offering the fringe or border of cloth, even when it is from an unworn garment. A lamp should be offered with ghee, or alternatively with sesame oil.

धूपार्थं गुग्गुलुं दद्याद्धृतयुक्तं मधूत्कटम् चन्दनं च तथा दद्यात्पिष्ट्वा च कुङ्कुमं शुभम् १८
For incense, one should offer guggulu mixed with ghee and honey. Sandalwood should also be offered, together with auspicious kuṅkuma that has been ground.

भूतृणं सुरसं शिगुं पालकं सिन्धुकं तथा कूष्माण्डालाबुवार्ताककोविदरांश्च वर्जयेत् १९
One should avoid bhūtṛṇa, surasa, śigu, pālaka, sindhuka, as well as kūṣmāṇḍa, ālābu, vārtāka, and kovidāra.

पिप्पलीं मरिचं चैव तथा वै पिण्डमूलकम् कृतं च लवणं सर्वं वंशाग्रं तु विवर्जयेत् २०
One should also avoid pippalī, black pepper, piṇḍamūlaka, prepared salt of every kind, and the tender tips of bamboo.

राजमाषान्मसूरांश्च कोद्रवान्कोरदूषकान् लोहितान्वृक्षनिर्यासान् श्राद्धकर्मणि वर्जयेत् २१
In the Śrāddha rite, one should avoid rājamāṣa beans, lentils, kodrava, koradūṣaka, red-coloured grains, and tree resins.

--- Page 21 ---

आम्रमामलकीमितं मृद्धीकादधिदाडिमान् विदार्यश्चैव रम्भाद्या दद्याच्छ्राद्धे प्रयत्नतः २२
One should carefully offer mangoes, āmalakī, grapes, curds, pomegranate, vidārya, plantains, and similar fruits at the Śrāddha.

धानालाजे मधुयुते सक्तून्शर्करया सह दद्याच्छ्राद्धे प्रयत्नेन शृङ्गाटकविसेतकान् २३
One should carefully offer fried grains and popped rice mixed with honey, roasted flour with sugar, and also śṛṅgāṭaka and visetaka at the Śrāddha.

भोजयित्वा द्विजान्भक्त्या स्वाचान्तान्दत्तदक्षिणान् अभिवाद्य पुनर्विप्राननुत्रज्य विसर्जयेत् २४
Having respectfully fed the Brāhmaṇas, after they have performed Ācamana and received their gifts, one should bow to them, accompany them for a short distance, and then respectfully bid them farewell.

निमन्त्रितस्तु यः श्राद्धे मैथुनं सेवते द्विजः श्राद्धं दत्त्वा च भुक्त्वा च युक्तः स्यान्महतैनसा २५
A Brāhmaṇa who, having been invited to a Śrāddha, engages in sexual intercourse after accepting and eating the Śrāddha food becomes burdened with great sin.

कालशाकं सशल्कांश्च मांसं वाध्रीणसस्य च खड्गमांसं तथाऽनन्तं यमः प्रोवाच धर्मवित् २६
The learned Yama declared that kāla-śāka with its stalks, the meat of the vādhriṇasa, the meat of the khaḍga, and ananta are [suitable offerings].

यद्ददाति गयाक्षेत्रे प्रभासे पुष्करे तथा प्रयागे नैमिषारण्ये सर्वमानन्त्यमश्नुते २७
Whatever is offered at Gayā, Prabhāsa, Puṣkara, Prayāga, or Naimiṣāraṇya attains everlasting merit.

गङ्गायमुनयोस्तीरे पयोष्ण्याभरकण्टके नर्मदायां गयातीरे सर्वमानन्त्यमुच्यते २८
Whatever is offered on the banks of the Gaṅgā and Yamunā, at Payoṣṇī and Bharakāṇṭaka, on the Narmadā, or at Gayā, is said to attain everlasting merit.

वाराणस्यां कुरुक्षेत्रे भृगुतुङ्गे महालये सप्तवेण्यृषि कूपे च तदप्यक्षय्यमुच्यते २९
Whatever is offered at Vārāṇasī, Kurukṣetra, Bhṛgutunga, Mahālaya, or at the Ṛṣi Kūpa of Saptaveṇī is likewise said to become imperishable.

म्लेच्छदेशे तथा रात्रौ संध्यायां च विशेषतः न श्राद्धमाचरेत्प्राज्ञो म्लेच्छदेशे न च व्रजेत् ३०
A wise person should not perform Śrāddha in a Mleccha country, at night, or particularly during the twilight period; nor should one travel to a Mleccha country for this purpose.

हस्तिच्छायासु यद्दत्तं यद्दत्तं राहुदर्शने विषुवत्ययने चैव सर्वमानन्त्यमुच्यते ३१
Whatever is offered under the shadow of an elephant, at the time of an eclipse by Rāhu, and at the equinox or solstice is said to attain everlasting merit.

प्रोष्ठपद्यामतीतायां मघायुक्तां त्रयोदशीम् प्राप्य श्राद्धं तु कर्तव्यं मधुना पायसेन वा ३२
When the thirteenth lunar day associated with Maghā occurs after the month of Proṣṭhapadā has passed, Śrāddha should be performed with honey or rice-pudding.

प्रजां पुष्टिं यशः स्वर्गमारोग्यं च धनं तथा नृणां श्राद्धैः सदा प्रीताः प्रयच्छन्ति पितामहाः ३३
The Pitāmahas, ever pleased by Śrāddha offerings, bestow upon people offspring, prosperity, fame, heaven, health, and wealth.

इति शाङ्ख धर्मशास्त्रे चतुर्दशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 22 ---

पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः
The fifteenth chapter.

अथ जननमरणाशौचवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the impurity arising from birth and death.

जनने मरणे चैव सपिण्डानां द्विजोत्तमः त्र्यहाच्छुद्धिमवाप्नोति योऽग्निवेदसमन्वितः १
At the birth or death of a Sapinda, a Brāhmaṇa who is learned in the Veda and maintains the sacred fires becomes purified after three days.

सपिण्डता तु पुरुषे सप्तमे विनिवर्तते नामधारकविप्रस्तु दशाहेन विशुध्यति २
The relationship of Sapinda-ship ceases in the seventh generation. A Brāhmaṇa who has formally received his name becomes purified after ten days.

क्षत्रियो द्वादशाहेन वैश्यः पक्षेण शुध्यति मासेन तु तथा शूद्रः शुद्धिमाप्नोति नान्तरा ३
A Kṣatriya becomes purified after twelve days, a Vaiśya after a fortnight, and a Śūdra after a month; there is no other prescribed interval.

रात्रिभिर्मासतुल्याभिर्गर्भस्रावे विशुध्यति अजातदन्तबाले तु सद्यः शौचं विधीयते ४
In the case of a miscarriage, purification is attained after a number of nights corresponding to the number of months of pregnancy. In the case of a child whose teeth have not yet appeared, purification is prescribed immediately.

अहोरात्रात्तथा शुद्धिर्बाले त्वकृतचूडके तथैवानुपनीते तु त्र्यहाच्छुध्यन्ति बान्धवाः ५
A child who has not undergone the Cūḍā ceremony becomes pure after a day and night; likewise, when the child has not undergone Upanayana, the relatives become purified after three days.

अनूढानां तु कन्यायां तथैव शूद्रजन्मनाम् अनूढभार्यः शूद्रस्तु षोडशाद्वत्सरात्परम् ६
In the case of an unmarried girl, and likewise in the case of those born in a Śūdra family, [the rule applies accordingly]. An unmarried wife, and a Śūdra after sixteen years of age, [are treated according to the prescribed rule].

मृत्युं समधिगच्छेच्चेन्मासात्तस्यापि बान्धवाः शुद्धिं समभिगच्छेयुर्नात्र कार्या विचारणा ७
If such a person dies after a month, his relatives likewise attain purification; there is no need for further deliberation in this matter.

पितृवेश्मनि या कन्या रजः पश्यत्यसंस्कृता तस्यां मृतायां नाशौचं कदाचिदपि शाम्यति ८
If an uninitiated unmarried girl begins menstruation in her father's house, then, if she dies, the impurity arising from her death does not cease at any particular prescribed time.

हीनवर्णां तु या नारी प्रमादात्प्रसवं व्रजेत् प्रसवे मरणे तज्ज्ञ्जमाशौचं नोपशाम्यति ९
If a woman of a lower varṇa, through negligence, gives birth, then in the event of her death during childbirth, the impurity arising from that death does not cease [according to the ordinary rule].

समानं खल्वशौचं तु प्रथमेन समापयेत् असमानं द्वितीयेन धर्मराजवचो यथा १०
When two periods of impurity are of equal duration, the first should be completed; when they are unequal, the second should be followed, according to the words of Dharmarāja.

देशान्तरगतः श्रुत्वा कुल्यानां मरणोद्भवौ यच्छेषं दशरात्रस्य तावदेवाशुचिर्भवेत् ११
If one who has gone to another country hears of the birth or death of a member of his family, he remains impure for however many days remain of the ten-day period.

अतीते दशरात्रे तु त्रिरात्रमशुचिर्भवेत् तथा संवत्सरेऽतीते स्नान एव विशुध्यति १२
If the ten-day period has already elapsed, he remains impure for three nights. If a year has passed, he becomes purified merely by bathing.

--- Page 23 ---

अनौरसेषु पुत्रेषु भार्यास्वन्यगतासु च परपूर्वासु च स्त्रीषु त्र्यहाच्छुद्धिरिहेष्यते १३
For sons who are not born of the lawful wife, for wives who have gone to another husband, and for women who were previously married, purification is prescribed after three days.

मातामहे व्यतीते तु आचार्ये च तथा मृते गृहे दत्तासु कन्यासु मृतासु च त्र्यहस्तथा १४
When the maternal grandfather or the teacher dies, and likewise when a girl who has been given in marriage from the household dies, three days of impurity are prescribed.

निवासराजनि प्रेते जाते दौहित्रके गृहे आचार्यपत्नीपुत्रेषु प्रेतेषु दिवसेन च १५
When a resident king dies, or when a daughter's son dies in the household, and when the wife or son of one's teacher dies, purification is attained after one day.

मातुले पक्षिणीं रात्रिं शिष्यर्विग्बान्धवेषु च सब्रह्मचारिण्येकाहमनूचाने तथा मृते १६
For the death of a maternal uncle, one night is prescribed; for a fellow student and related persons, and for a fellow Brahmacārin, one day; likewise, one day is prescribed when an Anūcāna dies.

एकरात्रं त्रिरात्रं च षड्रात्रं मासमेव च शूद्रे सपिण्डे वर्णानामाशौचं क्रमशः स्मृतम् १७
For a Śūdra Sapinda, the periods of impurity for the different varṇas are remembered in sequence as one night, three nights, six nights, and one month.

त्रिरात्रमथ षड्रात्रं पक्षं मासं तथैव च वैश्ये सपिण्डे वर्णानामाशौचं क्रमशः स्मृतम् १८
For a Vaiśya Sapinda, the periods of impurity for the different varṇas are remembered in sequence as three nights, six nights, a fortnight, and one month.

सपिण्डे क्षत्त्रिये शुद्धिः षड्रात्रं ब्राह्मणस्य तु वर्णानां परिशिष्टानां द्वादशाहं विनिर्दिशेत् १९
For a Kṣatriya Sapinda, purification is after six nights, while for a Brāhmaṇa it is prescribed after twelve days; the corresponding periods for the remaining varṇas are to be understood accordingly.

सपिण्डे ब्राह्मणे वर्णाः सर्व एवाविशेषतः दशरात्रेण शुध्येयुरित्याह भगवान्यमः २०
When the Sapinda is a Brāhmaṇa, all the varṇas, without distinction, should become purified after ten days; thus declares the venerable Yama.

भृग्वग्न्यनशनाम्भोभिर्मृतानामात्मघातिनाम् पतितानां च नाशौचं शस्त्रविद्युद्धताश्च ये २१
There is no period of impurity for those who die by falling, fire, starvation, or drowning; nor for those who die by suicide, for the fallen, or for those who are slain in battle.

यतिव्रतिब्रह्मचारिनृपकारुकदीक्षिताः नाशौचभाजः कथिता राजाज्ञाकारिणश्च ये २२
Ascetics, Vratins, Brahmacārins, kings, artisans, initiated persons, and those who act under the command of the king are said not to be subject to impurity.

यस्तु भुङ्गे पराशौचे वर्णी सोऽप्यशुचिर्भवेत् अशौचशुद्धौ शुद्धिश्च तस्याप्युक्ता मनीषिभिः २३
A person of the varṇa who eats during another person's period of impurity also becomes impure; the wise have likewise prescribed purification for him when that impurity is purified.

पराशौचे नरो भुक्त्वा कृमियोनौ प्रजायते भुक्त्वाऽन्नं म्रियते यस्य तस्य योनौ प्रजायते २४
A man who eats during another's period of impurity is born in the womb of worms; if he eats food belonging to one who dies, he is born in the same species as that person.

दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः स्वाध्यायः पितृकर्म च प्रेतपिण्डक्रियावर्जमाशौचे विनिवर्तते २५
During a period of impurity, giving gifts, accepting gifts, fire offerings, Vedic study, and ancestral rites are suspended, except for the offering of rice-balls to the departed.

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे पञ्चदशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 24 ---


अथ षोडशोऽध्यायः
Now, the sixteenth chapter.

अथद्रव्यशुद्धिः मृण्मयादिपात्रशुद्धिवर्णनम्
Now, the purification of substances and the description of the purification of earthen and other vessels.

मृण्मयं भाजनं सर्वं पुनः पाकेन शुध्यति मद्यैर्मूत्रैः पुरीषैश्च ष्ठीवनैः पूयशोणितैः १
All earthen vessels are purified by being fired again. If they are touched by wine, urine, excrement, saliva, pus, or blood, [they require purification accordingly].

संस्पृष्टं नैव शुध्येत पुनः पाकेन मृण्मयम् एतैरेव तथा स्पृष्टं ताम्रसौवर्नराजतम् २
An earthen vessel that has been contaminated by these substances cannot be purified merely by firing it again. Copper, gold, and silver vessels touched by these same substances [also require purification].

शुध्यत्यावर्तितं पश्चादन्यथा केवलाम्भसा आम्लोदकेन ताम्रस्य सीसस्य त्रपुणस्तथा ३
After being heated and turned over [in the process of purification], they become purified; otherwise, they are purified merely with water. Copper, lead, and tin are purified with acidic water.

क्षारेण शुद्धिः कांसस्य लोहस्य च विनिर्दिशेत् मुक्तामणिप्रवालानां शुद्धिः प्रक्षालनेन तु ४
Brass and iron are prescribed to be purified with alkali. Pearls, gems, and coral are purified by washing.

अब्जानां चैव भाण्डानां सर्वस्याश्ममयस्य च शाकवर्जं मूलफलविदलानां तथैव च ५
Water-born vessels and all vessels made of stone, except those used for vegetables, roots, fruits, and split [vegetable substances], [are purified by washing].

मार्जनाद्यज्ञपात्राणां पाणिना यज्ञकर्मणि उष्णाम्भसा तथा शुद्धिं सस्नेहानां विनिर्दिशेत् ६
Sacrificial vessels are purified by rubbing them with the hand during a sacrificial rite; vessels containing oily substances are prescribed to be purified with hot water.

शयनासनयानानां स्फ्यशूर्पशकटस्य च शुद्धिः संप्रोक्षणाद्यज्ञे कटमिन्धनयोस्तथा ७
Beds, seats, vehicles, the sphya, winnowing baskets, and carts are purified by sprinkling. In a sacrifice, the sacrificial platform and firewood are purified likewise by sprinkling.

मार्जनाद्वेश्मनां शुद्धिः क्षितेः शोधस्तु तत्क्षणात् संमार्जितेन तोयेन वाससां शुद्धिरिष्यते ८
Houses are purified by sweeping; the ground is purified immediately by cleansing it. Garments are considered purified by being washed with water.

बहूनां प्रोक्षणाच्छुद्धिर्धान्यादीनां विनिर्दिशेत् प्रोक्षणात्संहतानां च दारवाणां च तत्क्षणात् ९
For large quantities of grain and similar substances, purification is prescribed by sprinkling. Bundled wooden objects are likewise purified immediately by sprinkling.

सिद्धार्थकानां कल्केन शृङ्गदन्तमयस्य च गोवालैः फलपात्राणामस्थ्नां शृङ्गवतां तथा १०
Things made of horn and tooth are purified with a paste of white mustard; vessels for fruits, as well as objects made of bone and horn, are purified with cow hair.

निर्यासानां गुडानां च लवणानां तथैव च कुसुम्भकुङ्कुमानां च ऊर्णाकार्पासयोस्तथा ११
Resins, jaggery, salt, kusumbha, kuṅkuma, wool, and cotton [are likewise subject to the prescribed methods of purification].

--- Page 25 ---


प्रोक्षणात्कथिता शुद्धिरित्याह भगवान्यमः भूमिष्ठमुदकं शुद्धं शुचि तोयं शिलागतम् १२
The venerable Yama declares that purification is accomplished by sprinkling. Water standing upon the ground is pure, and water collected upon a stone is also pure.

वर्णगन्धरसैर्दुष्टैर्वर्जितं यदि तद्भवेत् शुद्धं नदीगतं तोयं सर्वदैव तथाऽऽकरः १३
If water is free from impurities of colour, smell, or taste, it is pure. Water flowing in a river is always considered pure, and so is water from a natural water source.

शुद्धं प्रसारितं पण्यं शुद्धे चाजाश्वयोर्मुखे मुखवर्जं तु गौः शुद्धा मार्जारश्चाऽऽक्रमे शुचिः १४
Goods that have been spread out are pure. The mouths of goats and horses are pure; the cow is considered pure except for its mouth, and a cat is pure when it passes over [an object].

शय्या भार्या शिशुर्वस्त्रमुपवीतं कमण्डलुः आत्मनः कथितं शुद्धं न शुद्धं हि परस्य च १५
A bed, wife, child, garment, sacred thread, and water-pot are considered pure for oneself, but not necessarily pure for another person.

नारीणां चैव वत्सानां शकुनीनां शुनां मुखम् रात्रौ प्रस्त्रवणे वृक्षे मृगयायां सदा शुचि १६
The mouths of women, calves, birds, and dogs are considered pure; at night, during urination, on a tree, and while hunting, [certain acts or objects] are likewise considered pure.

शुद्धा भर्तुश्चतुर्थेऽह्नि स्त्रानेन स्त्री रजस्वला दैवे कर्मणि पित्र्ये च पञ्चमेऽहनि शुध्यति १७
A menstruating woman becomes purified on the fourth day by bathing; for religious rites to the gods and ancestors, she becomes purified on the fifth day.

रथ्याकर्दमतोयेन ष्ठीवनाद्येन वाऽप्यथ नाभेरूवं नरः स्पृष्टः सद्यः स्त्रानेन शुध्यति १८
If a man is touched above the navel by street mud, water, saliva, or anything similar, he becomes purified immediately by bathing.

कृत्वा मूत्रं पुरीषं वा स्त्रात्वा भोक्तुमनास्तथा भुक्त्वा क्षुत्वा तथा सुप्त्वा पीत्वा चाम्भोऽवगाह्य च १९
After urinating or defecating, before eating, after eating, sneezing, sleeping, drinking water, or bathing, [the prescribed purification should be performed].

रथ्यां वाऽऽक्रम्य वाऽऽचामेद्वासो विपरिधाय च कृत्वा मूत्रपुरीषं च लेपगन्धापहं द्विजः २०
A Brāhmaṇa should perform Ācamana after walking on a public road or after putting on a garment; after urination or defecation, he should remove any impurity of contact and smell.

उद्धतेनाम्भसा शौचं मृदा चैव समाचरेत् मेहने मृत्तिकाः सप्त लिङ्गे द्वे परिकीर्तिते २१
Purification should be performed with clean water and earth. Seven applications of earth are prescribed for the anus and two for the penis.

एकस्मिन्विंशतिर्हस्ते द्वयोज्ञेयाश्चतुर्दश तिस्रस्तु मृत्तिका देयाः कृत्वा नखविशोधनम् २२
[For the prescribed cleansing,] twenty applications are to be understood for one, fourteen for two, and three applications of earth are to be made after cleaning the nails.

तिस्रस्तु पादयोज्ञेयाः शौचक्रामस्य सर्वदा शौचमेतद्ब्रहस्थानां द्विगुणं ब्रह्मचारिणाम् २३
Three applications are prescribed for the feet. This is the regular procedure of purification; for Brahmins it is to be twice as much, and for Brahmacārins [the prescribed amount is likewise increased].

त्रिगुणं च वनस्थानां यतीनां तु चतुर्गुणम् मृत्तिका च विनिर्दिष्टा त्रिपर्वाऽऽपूर्यते यथा २४
For forest-dwellers it is three times as much, and for ascetics four times as much. The quantity of earth is prescribed according to the threefold divisions [of the cleansing procedure].

इति शाङ्गे धर्मशास्त्रे षोडशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 26 ---

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्यायः
Now, the seventeenth chapter.

अथ क्षत्रियादिवधे गवाद्यपहारे व्रतवर्णनम्
Now, the description of the prescribed vows for the killing of Kṣatriyas and others and for the theft of cows and other [animals].

नित्यं त्रिषवणस्त्रायी कृत्वा प्रर्णकुटीं वने अधःशायी जटाधारी पर्णमूलफलाशनः १
Bathing three times every day, he should make a hut of leaves in the forest, sleep upon the ground, wear matted hair, and subsist on leaves, roots, and fruits.

ग्रामं विशेच्च भिक्षार्थं स्वकर्म परिकीर्तयन् एककालं समश्नीयाद्वर्षे तु द्वादशे गते २
He should enter the village to beg for alms, declaring his deed, and should eat only once a day. After twelve months have passed, [the vow is completed].

हेमस्तेयी सुरापश्च ब्रह्महा गुरुतल्पगः व्रतेनैतेन शुध्यन्ते महापातकिनस्त्विमे ३
A thief of gold, one who drinks intoxicating liquor, one who kills a Brāhmaṇa, and one who violates the teacher's bed—these great sinners are purified by this vow.

यागस्थं क्षत्त्रियं हत्वा वेश्यं हत्वा च याजकम् एतदेव व्रतं कुर्यादाश्रमं विनिदूषकः ४
Having killed a Kṣatriya engaged in a sacrifice, or a Vaiśya who is officiating as a priest, one should perform this same vow, without bringing disgrace upon one's āśrama.

कूटसाक्ष्यं तथैवोक्त्वा निक्षेपमपहृत्य च एतदेव व्रतं कुर्यात्त्यक्त्वा च शरणागतम् ५
Having given false testimony, having stolen a deposit entrusted to him, or having abandoned one who had sought refuge, one should perform this same vow.

आहिताग्नेः स्त्रियं हत्वा मित्रं हत्वा तथैव च हत्वा गर्भमविज्ञातमेतदेव व्रतं चरेत् ६
Having killed the wife of one who maintains the sacred fires, having killed a friend, or having unknowingly killed a fetus, one should perform this same vow.

वनस्थं च द्विजं हत्वा पार्थिवं च कृतागसम् एतदेव व्रतं कुर्याद् द्विगुणं च विशुद्धये ७
Having killed a Brāhmaṇa dwelling in the forest, or a king who has committed an offense, one should perform this same vow, twice over, for purification.

क्षत्त्रियस्य च पादोनं वधेऽर्थं वैश्यघातने अर्धमेव सदा कुर्यास्त्रीवधे पुरुषस्तथा ८
For the killing of a Kṣatriya, one should perform three-fourths of the vow; for the killing of a Vaiśya, half of it is prescribed. Likewise, a man who kills a woman should perform half of the vow.

पादं तु शूद्रहत्यायामुदक्यागमने तथा गोवधे च तथा कुर्यात्परदारगतस्तथा ९
For killing a Śūdra, for intercourse with a menstruating woman, for killing a cow, and likewise for intercourse with another man's wife, one should perform one-fourth of the vow.

पशून्हत्वा तथा ग्राम्यान्मासं कृत्वा विचक्षणः आरण्यानां बधे तद्वत्तदर्धं तु विधीयते १०
For killing domestic animals, a discerning person should perform the vow for one month; for killing wild animals, the same vow is prescribed for half that period.

हत्वा द्विजं तथा सर्पजलेशयबिलेशयान् सप्तरात्रं तथा कुर्याद्वतं ब्रह्महणस्तथा ११
For killing a Brāhmaṇa, and for killing a serpent, an aquatic creature, or an animal dwelling in a hole, one should perform the vow for seven nights; likewise, this is prescribed for one who has killed a Brāhmaṇa.

--- Page 27 ---

अनस्थ्नां शकटं हत्वा सास्थ्नां दशशतं तथा ब्रह्महत्याव्रतं कुर्यात्पूर्ण संवत्सरं नरः १२
A person who kills a cart without bones and one with bones [as prescribed] should perform the vow for killing a Brāhmaṇa for a full year.

यस्य यस्य च वर्णस्य वृत्तिच्छेदं समाचरेत् तस्य तस्य वधे प्रोक्तं प्रायश्चित्तं समाचरेत् १३
For whichever varṇa's means of livelihood one destroys, one should perform the prescribed expiation for killing a person of that varṇa.

अपहृत्ये तु वर्णानां भुवं प्राप्य प्रमादतः प्रायश्चित्तं वधे प्रोक्तं ब्राह्मणानुमतं चरेत् १४
If, through negligence, one takes away the land belonging to people of the different varṇas, one should perform the expiation prescribed for killing, with the approval of Brāhmaṇas.

गोजाश्वस्यापहरणे मणीनां रजतस्य च जलापहरणे चैव कुर्यात्संवत्सरव्रतम् १५
For stealing cows, horses, gems, silver, or water, one should perform a vow lasting one year.

तिलानां धान्यवस्त्राणां मद्यानामामिषस्य च संवत्सरार्धं कुर्वीत व्रतमेतत्समाहितः १६
For stealing sesame, grain, garments, alcoholic drinks, or meat, one should undertake this vow for half a year, with disciplined concentration.

तृणेक्षुकाष्ठतक्राणां रसानामपहारकः मासमेकं व्रतं कुर्याद्गन्धानां सर्पिषां तथा १७
One who steals grass, sugarcane, wood, buttermilk, or other substances of this kind should perform the vow for one month; the same applies to one who steals perfumes or ghee.

लवणानां गुडानां च मूलानां कुसुमस्य च मासार्धं तु व्रतं कुर्यादेतदेव समाहितः १८
For stealing salt, jaggery, roots, or flowers, one should perform this same vow for half a month, with disciplined concentration.

लौहानां वैदलानां च सूत्राणां चर्मणां तथा एकरात्रव्रतं कुर्यादेतदेव समाहितः १९
For stealing iron articles, articles made of reeds or bamboo, thread, or leather, one should perform this same vow for one night.

भुक्त्वा पलाण्डं लशुनं मद्यं च कवकानि च नारं मलं तथा मांसं विड्वराहं खरं तथा २०
Having eaten onions, garlic, alcoholic drinks, mushrooms, [and the prohibited flesh of] certain animals, as well as the flesh of the boar and donkey, [one incurs the prescribed fault].

गौधेरकुञ्जरोष्ट्र च सवपञ्चनखं तथा क्रव्यादं कुक्कुटं ग्राम्यं कुर्यात्संवत्सरं व्रतम् २१
For eating the flesh of the monitor lizard, elephant, camel, and all five-clawed animals, as well as carnivorous creatures and domestic fowl, one should perform a vow for one year.

भक्ष्याः पञ्चनखास्त्वेते गोधाकच्छपशल्लकाः खड्गश्च शशकश्चैव तान्हत्वा च चरेद्वतम् २२
The five-clawed animals considered fit to eat are the iguana, tortoise, porcupine, rhinoceros, and hare; having killed any of these, one should perform the prescribed vow.

हंसं मदुं बकं काकं काकोलं खञ्जरीटकम् मत्स्यादांश्च तथा मत्स्यान्बलाकं शुकसारिके २३
For eating a swan, the Madhu bird, a heron, a crow, a Kākolā, a Khañjarīṭaka, fish-eating birds, fish, a crane, a parrot, or a Sārikā, [the prescribed expiation applies].

चक्रवाकं प्लवं कोकं मण्डूकं भुजगं तथा मासमेकं व्रतं कुर्यादेतच्चैव न भक्षयेत् २४
For eating a Cakravāka, waterfowl, Koka, frog, or serpent, one should perform this vow for one month and should abstain from eating them thereafter.

--- Page 28 ---

राजीवान्सिंहतुण्डाश्च सशल्कांश्च तथैव च पाठीनरोहितौ भक्ष्यौ मत्स्येषु परिकीर्तितौ २५
The Rājīva, Siṃhatuṇḍa, and the fish covered with scales, as well as the Pāṭhīna and Rohita, are declared fit to be eaten among fish.

जलेचरांश्च जलजान्मुखाग्रनखविष्किरान् रक्तपादाञ्जालपादान्सप्ताहं व्रतमाचरेत् २६
For eating waterfowl, aquatic creatures, birds that catch their food with the tips of their beaks and claws, red-footed birds, and web-footed birds, one should perform a vow for seven days.

तित्तिरं च मयूरं च लावकं च कपिञ्जलम् वार्धीणसं वर्तकं च भक्ष्यानाह यमस्तथा २७
Yama likewise declares the Tittiri, peacock, Lāvaka, Kapiñjala, Vārddhīṇasa, and Vartaka to be fit for consumption.

भुक्त्वा चोभयतोदन्तं तथैकशफदंष्ट्रिणः तथा भुक्त्वा तु मांसं वै मासार्धं व्रतमाचरेत् २८
Having eaten animals with teeth in both jaws, or animals with one hoof and fangs, one should perform a vow for half a month.

स्वयं मृतं वृथा मांसं माहिषं त्वाजमेव च गोश्च क्षीरं विवत्सायाः संधिन्याश्च तथा पयः २९
One should avoid flesh from animals that have died naturally, useless or unsuitable meat, buffalo meat, goat meat, and the milk of a cow whose calf has died, as well as the milk of a cow that is pregnant.

संधिन्यमेध्यं भक्षित्वा पक्षं तु व्रतमाचरेत् क्षीराणि यान्यभक्ष्याणि तद्विकाराशने बुधः ३०
Having eaten the impure milk of a pregnant cow, one should perform a vow for a fortnight. A wise person who consumes prohibited kinds of milk or products made from them should [likewise undertake the prescribed expiation].

सप्तरात्रं व्रतं कुर्याद्यदेतत्परिकीर्तितम् लोहितान्वृक्षनिर्यासान्ब्रश्चनप्रभवांस्तथा ३१
For consuming the substances described above, one should perform a vow for seven nights; this also applies to red-coloured tree resins and those produced from cutting trees.

केवलानि च शुक्तानि तथा पर्युषितं च यत् गुडयुक्तं तथा भुक्त्वा त्रिरात्रं च व्रती भवेत् ३२
Having eaten sour preparations by themselves or stale food, or such food mixed with jaggery, one should undertake a vow for three nights.

दधि भैक्ष्यं च शुक्त्रेषु यच्चान्यद्दधिसंभवम् गुडशुक्तं तु भक्ष्यं स्यात्ससर्पिष्कमिति स्थितिः ३३
Curd, food obtained by begging, sour preparations, and other things made from curd [are permitted under the prescribed conditions]. Sour food mixed with jaggery is considered fit for consumption when accompanied by ghee.

यवगोधूमजाः सर्वे विकाराः पयसश्च ये राजवाडवकुल्यं च भक्ष्यं पर्युषितं भवेत् ३४
All preparations made from barley and wheat, and all preparations made from milk, as well as Rājavāḍavakulya, may be eaten even when they have become stale.

सजीवपक्वमांसं च सर्वं यत्नेन वर्जयेत् संवत्सरं व्रतं कुर्यात्प्राश्यैताञ्ज्ञानतस्तु तान् ३५
All meat cooked while the animal was still alive should be carefully avoided. If one knowingly consumes these prohibited things, one should perform a vow for one year.

शूद्रान्नं ब्राह्मणो भुक्त्वा तथा रङ्गावतारिणः चिकित्सकस्य क्षुद्रस्य तथा स्त्रीमृगजीविनः ३६
A Brāhmaṇa who eats food belonging to a Śūdra, or food belonging to an actor, physician, low-status person, or one who earns a living from women or animals, [incurs the prescribed impurity].

षण्डस्य कुलटायाश्च तथा बन्धनचारिणः बद्धस्य चैव चोरस्य अवीरायाः स्त्रियस्तथा ३७
Likewise, [food belonging to] a eunuch, a promiscuous woman, one who makes a living by imprisonment or confinement, a prisoner, a thief, or a woman without a husband [is to be avoided].

--- Page 29 ---

चर्मकारस्य वेणस्य क्लीवस्य पतितस्य च रुक्मकारस्य धूर्तस्य तथा वाधुषिकस्य च ३८
Having eaten food from a leather-worker, a Veṇa, a eunuch, an outcast, a goldsmith, a deceitful person, or a usurer,

कदर्यस्य नृशंसस्य वेश्यायाः कितवस्य च गणान्नं भूमिपालान्नमन्नं चैव श्वजीविनाम् ३९
or from a miser, a cruel person, a courtesan, a gambler, a member of a guild, a king, or one who lives by keeping dogs,

मौञ्जिकान्नं सूतिकान्नं भुक्त्वा मासं व्रतं चरेत् शूद्रस्य सततं भुक्त्वा षन्मासान्व्रतमाचरेत् ४०
Having eaten the food of a Mauñjika or of a woman who has recently given birth, one should observe a vow for one month; having habitually eaten the food of a Śūdra, one should observe a vow for six months.

वैश्यस्य तु तया भुक्त्वा त्रीन्मासान्व्रतमाचरेत् क्षत्त्रियस्य तथा भुक्त्वा द्वौमासौ व्रतमाचरेत् ४१
Having eaten the food of a Vaiśya in this manner, one should observe a vow for three months; having likewise eaten the food of a Kṣatriya, one should observe it for two months.

ब्राह्मणस्य तथा भुक्त्वा मासमेकं व्रतं चरेत् अपः सुराभाजनस्थाः पीत्वा पक्षं व्रतं चरेत् ४२
Having similarly eaten the food of a Brāhmaṇa, one should observe a vow for one month; having drunk water kept in a vessel used for liquor, one should observe a vow for half a month.

मद्यभाण्डगताः पीत्वा सप्तरात्रं व्रतं चरेत् शूद्रोच्छिष्टाशने मासं पक्षमेकं तथा विशः ४३
Having drunk water from a vessel used for liquor, one should observe a vow for seven nights; having eaten the remnants of a Śūdra, one should observe a vow for one month, and for half a month in the case of a Vaiśya.

क्षत्त्रियस्य तु सप्ताहं ब्रह्मणस्य तथा दिनम् अग्रश्राद्धाशने विद्वान्मासमेकं व्रती भवेत् ४४
In the case of a Kṣatriya, one should observe it for one week, and in the case of a Brāhmaṇa, for one day; a learned person who eats food from the first offering of a Śrāddha should observe a vow for one month.

परिवित्तिः परिवेत्ता च यया च परिविन्दति व्रतं संवत्सरं कुर्युर्दातृयाजकपञ्चमाः ४५
The elder brother who remains unmarried while the younger marries, the younger brother who marries before the elder, and the woman through whom such a marriage takes place, together with the giver and the officiating priest, should observe a vow for one year.

काकोच्छिष्टं गवाऽऽघ्रातं भुक्त्वा पक्षं व्रती भवेत् दूषितं केशकीटैश्च मूषिकालाङ्गलेन च ४६
Having eaten food polluted by a crow or smelled by a cow, one should observe a vow for half a month; likewise, food polluted by hair, insects, a mouse, or a plough,

मक्षिकामशकेनापि त्रिरात्रं तु व्रती भवेत् वृथा कृसरसंयावपायसापूपशष्कुलीः ४७
and even by a fly or mosquito, requires observance of a vow for three nights; having eaten improperly prepared kṛsara, saṃyāva, pāyasa, apūpa, or śaṣkulī,

भुक्त्वा त्रिरात्रं कुर्वीत व्रतमेतत्समाहितः नील्या चैव क्षतो विप्रः शुना दष्टस्तथैव च ४८
one should attentively observe this vow for three nights; a Brāhmaṇa wounded by indigo, and one bitten by a dog,

त्रिरात्रं तु व्रतं कुर्यात्पुंश्चलीदशनक्षतः पादप्रतापनं कृत्वा वहिं कृत्वा तथाऽप्यधः ४९
should likewise observe a vow for three nights; one who has been wounded by the bite of a promiscuous woman should heat his feet and perform the prescribed fire ritual beneath them,

कुशैः प्रमृज्य पादौ च दिनमेकं व्रती भवेत् नीलीवस्त्रं परी धाय भुक्त्वा स्नानार्हणस्तथा ५०
and, having wiped his feet with kuśa grass, should observe a vow for one day; having worn blue garments and eaten food, he should bathe and perform the prescribed worship.

--- Page 30 ---

त्रिरात्रं च व्रतं कुर्य्याच्छित्त्वा गुल्मलतास्तथा अध्यास्य शयनं यानमासनं पादुके तथा ५१
He should observe a three-night vow after cutting shrubs and creepers, and after lying on a bed, riding in a vehicle, sitting on a seat, or wearing wooden sandals.

पलाशस्य द्विजश्रेष्ठस्त्रिरात्रं तु व्रती भवेत् वाग्दुष्टं भावदुष्टं च भाजने भावदूषिते भुक्त्वाऽन्नं ब्राह्मणः पश्चात्त्रिरात्रं तु व्रती भवेत् ५२
The excellent Brāhmaṇa should observe a three-night vow for [improperly using] palāśa wood. A Brāhmaṇa who has eaten food from a vessel defiled by improper speech, improper intention, or improper sentiment should thereafter observe a three-night vow.

क्षत्त्रियस्तु रणे दत्त्वा पृष्ठं प्राणपरायणः संवत्सरव्रतं कुर्य्याच्छित्त्वा वृत्तं फलप्रदम् ५३
A Kṣatriya who turns his back in battle, seeking to preserve his life, should observe a vow for one year, abandoning the conduct that produces [the proper] fruits.

दिवा च मैथुनं गत्वा स्त्रात्वा नग्ग्रस्तथाऽम्भसि नम्नां परस्त्रियं दृष्ट्वा दिनमेकं व्रती भवेत् ५४
One who engages in sexual intercourse during the day, bathes naked in water, or looks upon a naked woman other than his wife should observe a one-day vow.

क्षिप्त्वाऽग्नावशुचि द्रव्यं तदेवाम्भसि मानवः मासमेकं व्रतं कुर्यादुपक्रुध्य तथा गुरुम् ५५
A person who throws an impure substance into fire, or likewise into water, should observe a vow for one month; so too should one who angrily insults or acts against his guru.

पीतावशेषं पानीयं पीत्वा च ब्राह्मणः क्वचित् त्रिरात्रं तु व्रतं कुर्याद्वामहस्तेन वा पुनः ५६
A Brāhmaṇa who drinks water left over after another has drunk from it should observe a three-night vow; likewise, he should do so if he [eats or drinks] with the left hand.

एकपङ्गयुपविष्टेषु विषमं यः प्रयच्छति स च तावदसौ पक्षं कुर्यात्तु ब्राह्मणो व्रतम् ५७
A Brāhmaṇa who, among persons seated in a single row, serves unequally [to them] should observe a vow for a fortnight.

धारयित्वा तुलाचार्यं विषमं कारयेद्वणिक् सुरालवणमद्यानां दिनमेकं व्रती भवेत् ५८
A merchant who, having adopted the balance as his measure, causes unequal weighing should observe a one-day vow [for dealings involving] liquor, salt, and intoxicating substances.

मांसस्य विक्रयं कृत्वा कुर्याच्चैव महाव्रतम् विक्रीय पणिना मद्यं तिलस्य च तथाऽऽचरेत् ५६
One who sells meat should undertake the great vow; likewise, one who sells liquor or sesame for money should perform the same [penance].

हुंकारं ब्राह्मणस्योक्त्वा त्वंकारं च गरीयसः  दिनमेकं व्रतं कुर्यात्प्रयतः सुसमाहितः ६०
One who addresses a Brāhmaṇa with a contemptuous “Huṃ” or addresses a superior with an improper “you” should, being disciplined and composed, observe a one-day vow.

प्रेतस्य प्रेतकार्याणि अकृत्वा धनहारकः वर्णानां यद्वतं प्रोक्तं तद्वतं प्रयतश्चरेत् ६१
One who takes the wealth of a deceased person without performing the prescribed rites for the dead should carefully undertake the vow prescribed for the respective class.

कृत्वा पापं न गुहेत गुह्यमानं विवर्धते कृत्वा पापं बुधः कुर्यात्पर्षदोऽनुमतं व्रतम् ६२
Having committed a sin, one should not conceal it, for a sin that is concealed increases. After committing a sin, a wise person should undertake the penance approved by the learned assembly.

--- Page 31 ---

तस्करश्वापदाकीर्णे बहुव्यालमृगे वने न वतं ब्राह्मणः कुर्य्यात्प्राणवाधाभयात्सदा ६३
In a forest infested with thieves, wild beasts, and many dangerous animals, a Brāhmaṇa should never undertake a vow, out of fear for his life.

सर्वत्र जीवनं रचेजीवन्पापमपोहति व्रतैः कृच्छ्रेश्च दानैश्च इत्याह भगवान्यमः ६४
One should arrange for the preservation of life in every circumstance; by remaining alive, one can remove sin through vows, Kṛcchras, and gifts. Thus spoke the venerable Yama.

शरीरं धर्मसर्वस्वं रक्षणीयं प्रयत्नतः शरीरात्स्रवते धर्मः पर्वतात्सलिलं यथा ६५
The body is the very foundation of all Dharma and must therefore be carefully protected. Dharma flows forth from the body just as water flows from a mountain.

आलोच्य धर्मशास्त्राणि समेत्य ब्राह्मणैः सह प्रायश्चित्तं द्विजो दद्यात्स्वेच्छ्या न कथंचन ६६
Having examined the Dharmaśāstras and consulted with Brāhmaṇas, a twice-born person should undertake the prescribed expiation; he should never determine it merely according to his own desire.

इति शाङ्ख धर्मशास्त्रे सप्तदशोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra.

अथाष्टादशोऽध्यायः
Now begins the Eighteenth Chapter.

अघमर्षण पराक कृच्छ्र अतिकृच्छ्र सान्तापनादिव्रतम्
The vows of Aghamarṣaṇa, Parāka, Kṛcchra, Atikṛcchra, Sāntapana, and others.

त्र्यहं त्रिषवणस्त्रायी स्त्राने स्त्रानेऽघमर्षणम् निमग्नस्त्रिः पठेदप्सु न भुञ्जीत दिनत्रयम् १
For three days, he should bathe three times a day and recite the Aghamarṣaṇa hymn at each bath. Immersing himself in the waters, he should recite it three times and should not eat for three days.

वीरासनं च तिष्ठेत गां दद्याच्च पयस्विनीम् अघमर्षणमित्येतद्वतं सर्वाघनाशनम् २
He should remain seated in the Vīrāsana posture and should give a milch cow as a gift. This vow is called Aghamarṣaṇa and destroys all sins.

त्र्यहं सायं त्र्यहं प्रातस्त्र्यहमद्यादयाचितम् त्र्यहं परं च नाश्नीयात्प्राजापत्यं चरन्व्रतम् ३
For three days he should eat in the evening, for three days in the morning, and for three days he should eat food obtained without asking. For the next three days he should eat nothing. This is the Prājāpatya vow.

त्र्यहमुष्णं पिवेत्तोयं त्र्यहमुष्णं घृतं पिवेत् त्र्यहमुष्णं पयः पीत्वा वायुभक्षत्र्यहं भवेत् ४
For three days he should drink hot water; for three days he should drink hot ghee; for three days he should drink hot milk; and for three days he should subsist on air.

तप्तकृच्छ्रं विजानीयाच्छीतैः शीतमुदाहृतम् द्वादशाहोपवासेन पराकः परिकीर्तितः ५
This is known as the Taptakṛcchra when the substances are taken hot; when they are taken cold, it is called the Śītakṛcchra. A fast of twelve days is declared to be the Parāka vow.

विधिनोदकसिद्धानि मासमश्नीत यत्नतः स कृत्वा सोदकान्मासं कृच्छ्रे वारुणमुच्यते ६
One should carefully eat for a month food prepared according to the prescribed rules and cooked with water. Having observed this for a month with water, it is called the Vāruṇa Kṛcchra.

बिल्वैरामलकैर्वाऽपि पद्माचैरथवा शुभैः मासेन लोकेऽतिकृच्छ्रः कथ्यते बुद्धिसत्तमैः ७
A month of subsisting on bilva fruits, āmalaka fruits, or auspicious lotus roots is called the Atikṛcchra by the wise.

गोमूत्रं गोमयं क्षीरं दधि सर्पिः कुशोदकम् एकरात्रोपवासश्च कृच्छ्रे सांतपनं स्मृतम् ८
Cow’s urine, cow dung, milk, curd, ghee, and water in which kuśa grass has been placed, followed by a fast for one night—this is remembered as the Sāntapana Kṛcchra.

--- Page 32 ---

एतैस्तु त्र्यहमभ्यस्तं महासांतपनं स्मृतम् पिण्याकं वामतक्राम्बुसक्तूनां प्रतिवासरम् ९
Practising these for three days is remembered as the Mahāsāntapana. Pīṇyāka, or the residue of pressed oilseeds, buttermilk, water, and saktu flour are to be taken on successive days.

उपवासान्तराभ्यासात्तुलापुरुष उच्यते गोपुरीषाशनो भूत्वा मासं नित्यं समाहितः १०
By practising fasting on alternate days, it is called the Tulāpuruṣa vow. Having subsisted on cow dung, one should remain disciplined for a month.

व्रतं तु यावकं कुर्यात्सर्वपापनुत्तये ग्रासं चन्द्रकलावृद्धया प्राश्नीयाद्वर्धयन्सदा ११
For the removal of all sins, one should undertake the Yāvaka vow. One should eat a morsel each day, increasing the quantity according to the waxing phases of the Moon.

ह्रासयेच्च कलाहानौ व्रतं चान्द्रायणं चरेत् मुण्डस्त्रिषवणस्त्रायी अधः शायी जितेन्द्रियः १२
As the lunar digits wane, one should correspondingly decrease the quantity of food and undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa vow. One should have the head shaven, bathe three times a day, sleep on the ground, and keep the senses under control.

स्त्रीशूद्रपतितानां च वर्जयेत्परिभाषणम् पवित्राणि जपेच्छक्त्या जुहुयाच्चैव शक्तितः १३
One should refrain from speaking with women, Śūdras, and fallen persons. One should recite the sacred texts to the best of one's ability and perform offerings into the fire according to one's capacity.

अयं विधिः स विज्ञेयः सर्वकृच्छ्रेषु सर्वदा पापात्मानस्तु पापेभ्यः कृच्छ्रेः संतारिता नराः १४
This procedure should always be understood to apply to all the Kṛcchra vows. Sinful persons are carried across and freed from their sins through these Kṛcchra observances.

गतपापादिकं यान्ति नात्र कार्या विचारणा शङ्खप्रोक्तमिदं शास्त्रं योऽधीते बुद्धिमान्नरः सर्वपापविनिर्मुक्तः स्वर्गलोके महीयते १५
They attain freedom from their accumulated sins; there should be no doubt about this. Whoever, being wise, studies this Śāstra taught by Śaṅkha, becomes freed from all sins and is honoured in the heavenly world.

इति शाङ्ख धर्मशास्त्रेऽष्टादशोऽध्यायः समाप्ताचेयं शङ्खस्मृतिः
Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Śāṅkha Dharmaśāstra. This Śaṅkha Smṛti is hereby concluded.


