--- Page 1 ---
विष्णुस्मृतिः
श्रीगणेशाय नमः

महामते महाप्राज्ञ सर्वशास्त्रविशारद । अक्षीणकर्म बन्धस्तु पुरुषो द्विजसत्तम १
O greatly wise one, highly discerning, and learned in all the scriptures, O best of the twice-born, tell me: how does a person remain bound by the bonds of karma that do not perish? १

सततं किं जपन् जप्यं विबुधः किमनुस्मरन् मरणे यज्जपं जप्यं यञ्च भावमनुस्मरन् २
What should the wise person constantly recite as a sacred formula, and what should he remember? What should be recited at the time of death, and what state of being should he remember? २

यच्च ध्यात्वा द्विजश्रेष्ठ पुरुषो मुत्युमागतः परम्पदमवाप्नोति तन्मे वद महामुनेः ३
O best of the twice-born, tell me that upon which a person should meditate and, having reached death, attain the Supreme State. ३

शौनक उवाच
Śaunaka said

इदमेव महाराज पृष्टवांस्ते पितामहः भीष्मं धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठं धर्मपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः ४
O great king, your grandfather Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, asked Bhīṣma, the foremost among those who uphold righteousness, this very question. ४

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
Yudhiṣṭhira said

पितामह महाप्राज्ञ सर्वशास्त्र विशारद प्रयाणकाले यच्चिन्त्यं सूरिभिस्तत्वचिन्तकैः ५
O grandfather, greatly wise and learned in all the scriptures, what should be contemplated by the wise and those who contemplate the Truth at the time of departure from this world? ५

किन्नु स्मरन् कुरुश्रेष्ठ मरणे पर्युपस्थिते प्राप्नुयात्परमां सिद्धिं श्रोतुमिच्छामि तद्वद ६
O best of the Kurus, what should one remember when death has approached so that one may attain the highest perfection? I wish to hear this from you; please tell me. ६

भीष्म उवाच
Bhīṣma said

अद्भुतं च हितं सूक्ष्मं उक्तं प्रश्नं त्वयानघ शृणुष्वावहितो राजन् नारदेन पुरा श्रुतम् ७
O sinless one, you have asked a wonderful, beneficial, and subtle question. Listen attentively, O king, to what was once heard by Nārada. ७

श्रीवत्साङ्क जगद्बीजमनन्तं लोकसाक्षिणम् पुरा नारायणं देवं नारदः परिपृष्टवान् ८
Nārada once questioned the divine Nārāyaṇa, marked with the Śrīvatsa, the seed of the universe, the Infinite One, and the witness of the worlds. ८

नारद उवाच
Nārada said

त्वमक्षरं परं ब्रह्म निर्गुणं तमसः परम् आहुर्वेद्यं परं धाम ब्रह्मादि कमलोद्भवम् ९
You are the imperishable Supreme Brahman, beyond the guṇas and beyond darkness; you are said to be the supreme object of knowledge and the highest abode, from whom Brahmā and the lotus-born beings arise. ९

भगवन् भूतभव्येश श्रद्दधानै जितेन्द्रियैः कथं भक्तैर्विचिन्त्योऽसि योगिभिर्देहमोक्षिभिः १०
O Lord, O Master of the past and the future, how are You to be contemplated by faithful devotees who have conquered their senses, by yogīs who seek liberation from the body? १०


--- Page 2 ---
   
किं च जप्यं जपेन्नित्यं कल्यमुत्थाय मानवाः कथं युञ्जन् सदा ध्यायन् ब्रूहि तत्त्वं सनातनम् ११
What should people constantly recite as a japa after rising early, and how should they continually discipline themselves and meditate? Tell me the eternal truth. ११

भीष्म उवाच
Bhīṣma said:

श्रुत्वा तस्य तु देवर्षेर्वाक्यं वाचस्पतिः स्वयम् प्रोवाच भगवान् विष्णुर्नारदं वरदः प्रभुः १२
Having heard the words of that divine sage, the Lord Viṣṇu Himself, the Lord who bestows boons, spoke to Nārada. १२

श्रीभगवानुवाच
The Blessed Lord said:

हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि इमां दिव्यामनुस्मृतिम् मरणे मामनुस्मृत्य प्राप्नोति परमां गतिम् १३
Listen, I shall tell you this divine teaching of remembrance; by remembering Me at the time of death, one attains the supreme state. १३

यामधीत्य प्रयाणे तु मद्भावायोपपद्यते ओङ्कारमग्रतः कृत्वा मां नमस्कृत्य नारद १४
Having studied this, one attains My state at the time of departure; therefore, O Nārada, placing Oṃ first and bowing to Me, १४

एकाग्रः प्रयतो भूत्वा इमं मन्त्रमुदीरयेत् अवशेनापि यन्नाम्नि कीर्तिते सर्वपातकैः १५
having become focused and disciplined, one should utter this mantra. Even when His name is uttered involuntarily, from all sins १५

पुमान् विमुच्यते सद्यः सिंहत्रस्तैर्मृगैरिव ओमित्येव परं ब्रह्म शाश्वतं परमव्ययम् १६
a person is immediately freed, just as animals flee in terror from a lion. Oṃ alone is the supreme Brahman, eternal and imperishable. १६

एतदुच्चारयन्मर्यो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च रुद्रश्च सर्वमोमिति चोच्यते १७
A mortal who utters this becomes fit to attain the state of Brahman. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Rudra are all said to be represented by Oṃ. १७

सम्पन्नेऽसुरसंथाने नम्यते च मुमुक्षुभिः मोक्षश्च ज्ञानिनां प्रोक्तो मोहश्चाज्ञानिनां स्मृतः १८
When the assembly of the gods and demons is complete, He is bowed to by those who seek liberation; for the wise He is spoken of as liberation, while for the ignorant He is remembered as delusion. १८

यस्य यादृग्विधो भावस्तस्य तादृग्विधो हरिः भवे भवनविश्वात्मा भूतानां हितकाम्यया १९
As is the disposition of a person, so does Hari become for that person; the universal Self of all beings, He manifests in various forms for the welfare of creatures. १९

सृजते आत्मनात्मानमात्मन्येव स्वमायया हरिरेव सतां नित्यं शरण्यः शरणार्थिनाम् २०
By His own Māyā, He creates Himself from Himself, within Himself; Hari alone is eternally the refuge of the virtuous and of those who seek refuge. २०

न हि नारायणादन्यस्त्रिषु लोकेषु विद्यते वसत्यमृतमक्षय्यं यस्मिन् लोकाः ससागराः २१
There is none other than Nārāyaṇa in the three worlds. In Him dwells the imperishable immortality, in whom abide all the worlds together with their oceans. २१

त एव सृजते लोकान् सृष्टिकाले जगत्प्रभुः तेजांसि येन दिव्यन्ते महोत्पन्नेन तेजसा २२
He, the Lord of the universe, creates the worlds at the time of creation; by His great manifested radiance, all lights shine. २२

--- Page 3 ---
      
वासुदेवात्मकं सर्वं तत्तेजोऽपि हि नान्यथा वासनाद्यास्तु ये भावाः सम्भवन्ति युगे युगे २३
All this is of the nature of Vāsudeva, and that radiance too is none other than He. The various tendencies and dispositions that arise in every age, २३

लोकत्रयहितार्थाय स्वोकाराय नो हरिः यतश्चोत्पद्यते विश्वं यस्मिन्नेव प्रलिप्यते २४
for the welfare of the three worlds, are assumed by Hari according to His own purpose. From Him the universe arises, and into Him alone it dissolves. २४

क्षराक्षरविसृष्टस्तु सोऽच्युतः पुरुषोत्तमः अव्यक्तं शाश्वतं देवं प्रभवं पुरुषोत्तमम् २५
He who is beyond the created realms of the perishable and imperishable is Acyuta, the Supreme Person. I take refuge in the unmanifest, eternal Lord, the source, the Supreme Person. २५

प्रपद्ये प्राञ्जलिर्विष्णुमक्षय्यं भक्तवत्सलम् पुराणं पुरुषं दिव्यमद्भूतं लोकपावनम् २६
With folded hands I take refuge in Viṣṇu, the imperishable and compassionate toward His devotees, the ancient Divine Person, wondrous and sanctifying the worlds. २६

प्रपद्ये पुण्डरीकाक्षं देवं नारायणं हरिम् लोकनाथं सहस्राक्षमक्षरं परमं पदम् २७
I take refuge in the lotus-eyed Lord Nārāyaṇa, Hari, the Lord of the worlds, the thousand-eyed, the imperishable, the supreme abode. २७

भगवन्तं प्रपन्नोऽस्मि भूतभव्यप्रभुं विभुम् स्रष्टारं सर्वलोकानामनन्तं विश्वतोमुखं २८
I have taken refuge in the Blessed Lord, the sovereign of all that has been and all that will be, the all-pervading Creator of all the worlds, infinite and facing in every direction. २८

पद्मनाभं हृषीकेशं प्रपद्ये सत्यमच्युतम् हिरण्यगर्भममृतं भूगर्भ परतः परम् २९
I take refuge in Padmanābha, Hṛṣīkeśa, the Truth, Acyuta, the Golden Womb, the Immortal One, the indwelling Self of the earth, and the One who is beyond the beyond. २९

प्रभुं विभुमनाद्यन्तं प्रपद्ये तं रविप्रभम् सहस्रशीर्षं पुरुषं महर्षि सत्यभावनम् ३०
I take refuge in that Lord, all-pervading, without beginning or end, radiant like the sun, the thousand-headed Puruṣa, the great Seer, the embodiment of truth. ३०

प्रपद्ये सूक्ष्ममचलं वरेण्यमभयप्रदम् नारायणं पुराणेशं योगात्मानं सनातनम् ३१
I take refuge in the subtle, immovable, most excellent, fear-dispelling Nārāyaṇa, the ancient Lord, whose nature is Yoga, the eternal One. ३१

संज्ञानां सर्वसत्वानां प्रपद्ये ध्रुवमीश्वरम् यः प्रभुः सर्वलोकानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् ३२
I take refuge in the eternal Lord, the source of awareness in all beings, who is the sovereign of all worlds and by whom all this is pervaded. ३२

चराचरगुरुर्देवः स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु यस्मादुत्पद्यते ब्रह्मा पद्मयोनिः पितामहः ३३
May that Lord Viṣṇu, the divine teacher of all that moves and does not move, be gracious to me, from whom Brahmā, the lotus-born Grandfather, arises. ३३

ब्रह्मयोनिर्हि विश्वस्य स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु चतुर्भिश्च चतुर्भिश्च द्वाभ्यां पञ्चभिरेवच ३४
May that Viṣṇu, who is indeed the source of the universe and of Brahmā, be gracious to me; by four, by four, by two, and by five, ३४

हूयते च पुनर्द्राभ्यां स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु पर्जन्यः पृथिवी सस्यं कालो धर्मः क्रियाक्रिये ३५
and again by two, the offering is made; may that Viṣṇu be gracious to me. He is the rain, the earth, the crops, time, dharma, action, and non-action. ३५



--- Page 4 ---
   
गुणाकरः स मे विष्णुर्वासुदेवः प्रसीदतु अग्निसोमार्कताराणां ब्रह्मरुद्रेन्द्रयोगिनाम् ३६
May that Viṣṇu, Vāsudeva, the repository of virtues, be gracious to me; He who illumines the radiance of Agni, Soma, the Sun, the stars, Brahmā, Rudra, Indra, and the Yogins. ३६

यस्तेजयति तेजांसि स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु कार्य क्रिया च करणं कर्त्ता हेतुः प्रयोजनम् ३७
May that Viṣṇu be gracious to me, who gives brilliance to all radiances, and who is the effect, the action, the instrument, the agent, the cause, and the purpose. ३७

अक्रिया करणी कार्यं स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु शमीगर्भस्य यो गर्भस्तस्य गर्भस्य यो रिपुः ३८
May that Viṣṇu be gracious to me, who is actionlessness, the instrument, and the effect; who is the embryo within the Śamī, and the enemy of that embryo. ३८

रिपुगर्भस्य यो गर्भः स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु अबलो येन बालेन कंसमल्लो महाबलः ३९
May that Viṣṇu be gracious to me, who is the embryo within the embryo of the enemy; He by whom the mighty wrestler Kaṃsa, though powerful, was overcome by a mere child. ३९

चाणूरो निहतो रङ्गे स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु शङ्खः करवरे यस्य स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु ४०
May that Viṣṇu be gracious to me, by whom Cāṇūra was slain in the arena; He whose weapon in His hand is the conch. ४०

येन क्रान्तास्त्रयो लोका दानवाश्च वशीकृताः शरणं सर्वभूतानां स मे विष्णुः प्रसीदतु ४१
May that Viṣṇu be gracious to me, who traversed the three worlds and brought the Dānavas under control; He who is the refuge of all beings. ४१

योगावास नमस्तुभ्यं सर्वावास वरप्रद सर्वादि वासनाद्यादि वासुदेव प्रधानकृत् ४२
Salutations to You, the abode of Yoga, the abode of all, the bestower of boons, the origin of all, the origin of all tendencies and dispositions, Vāsudeva, the one who establishes the Primordial Principle. ४२

यज्ञगर्भ हिरण्याङ्ग पञ्चयज्ञ नमोऽस्तुते चतुर्मूर्त्तिः परन्धाम लक्षानन्दवरार्चित ४३
O Womb of sacrifice, O Golden-limbed One, O Fivefold Sacrifice, salutations to You. You are of four forms, the supreme abode, worshipped by the excellent ones with countless joys. ४३

अजस्त्वमगमः पन्था ह्यमूर्त्तिविश्वमूर्त्तिधृक् श्रीकर्तः पञ्चकालज्ञ नमस्ते ज्ञानसागर ४४
You are unborn, the imperishable path, formless yet bearing the form of the universe, the creator of prosperity, the knower of the five divisions of time; salutations to You, O ocean of knowledge. ४४

अव्यक्ताद्वयक्तमुत्पन्नमव्यक्ताद्यः परोऽक्षरः यस्मात्परतरन्नास्ति तमस्मि शरणं गतः ४५
From the Unmanifest the manifest has arisen; You are beyond the Unmanifest and the Imperishable. I have taken refuge in Him beyond whom there is nothing higher. ४५

न प्रधानो न च महान् पुरुषश्चेतनो ह्यजः अनयोग्यः परतरस्तमस्मि शरणं गतः ४६
He is neither Pradhāna nor Mahat; He is the conscious, unborn Puruṣa, beyond what is accessible to ordinary understanding. I have taken refuge in Him who is supreme. ४६

चिन्तयन्तोऽपि यन्नित्यं ब्रह्मेशानादयः प्रभुम् निश्चयं नाधिगच्छन्ति तमस्मि शरणं गतः ४७
Even Brahmā, Īśāna, and the other great beings constantly contemplate that Lord, yet do not attain certainty concerning Him. I have taken refuge in Him. ४७

जितेन्द्रिया जितात्मानो ज्ञानध्यानपरायणाः यं प्राप्य न निवर्त्तन्ते तमस्मि शरणं गतः ४८
Having conquered their senses and mastered themselves, those devoted to knowledge and meditation attain Him and do not return. I have taken refuge in Him. ४८

--- Page 5 ---
      
एकांशेन जगत्कृत्स्त्रमवष्टभ्य विभुः स्थितः अग्राह्यो निर्गुणो नित्यस्तमस्मि शरणं गतः ४९
Permeating and sustaining the entire universe with only a fraction of Himself, the all-pervading Lord stands established. He is beyond grasp, without attributes, and eternal. I have taken refuge in Him. ४९

सोमार्काग्निगतन्तेजो या च तारामयी द्युतिः दिवि संजायते यो यः स महात्मा प्रसीदतु ५०
May that Great Self be gracious, whose radiance abides in Soma, the Sun, and Fire, and whose star-filled brilliance arises in the heavens. ५०

सूर्यमध्यस्थितः सोमस्तस्य मध्ये च यास्तिता भूतबाह्याचरा दीप्तिः स महात्मा प्रसीदतु ५१
May that Great Self be gracious, who is the Soma situated within the Sun, and within Soma is the radiance that illuminates beings, both internal and external, and all that moves. ५१

सगुणे निर्गुणश्चासौ लक्ष्मीवान् चेतनो ह्यजः सूक्ष्मः सर्वगतो देही स महात्मा प्रसीदतु ५२
May that Great Self be gracious, who is both with attributes and without attributes, endowed with Lakṣmī, conscious, unborn, subtle, all-pervading, and embodied. ५२

साङ्ख्ययोगाश्च ये चान्ये सिद्धाश्च परमर्षयः यं विदित्वा विमुच्यन्ते स महात्मा प्रसीदतु ५३
May that Great Self be gracious, knowing whom the followers of Sāṅkhya and Yoga, as well as the accomplished ones and supreme sages, become liberated. ५३

अव्यक्तः समधिष्ठाता ह्यचिन्त्यः सदसत्परः आस्थितः प्रकृतिं भुङ्गे स महात्मा प्रसीदतु ५४
May that Great Self be gracious, who is unmanifest, the supreme indwelling ruler, inconceivable, beyond both being and non-being, and who, abiding in Prakṛti, experiences it. ५४

क्षेत्रज्ञः पञ्चधा भुङ्गे प्रकृतिं पञ्चभिर्मुखैः निर्विकार नमस्तेऽस्तु साक्षिक्षेत्रिध्रुवस्थितः ५५
The Knower of the Field experiences Prakṛti in fivefold form through its five avenues. Salutations to You, O changeless One, who stand eternally as the witnessing Knower of the Field. ५५

अतीन्द्रिय नमस्तुभ्यं लिङ्गैर्व्यक्तैर्न मीयसे ये च त्वां नाभिजानन्ति संसारे सञ्चरन्ति ते ५६
Salutations to You, O One beyond the senses. You cannot be measured by manifest signs. Those who do not know You continue to wander in saṃsāra. ५६

कामक्रोधविनिर्मुक्ता भक्तास्त्वां प्रविशन्ति च अव्यक्तमत्यहङ्कारा मनोभूतेन्द्रियाणि च ५७
Devotees who are free from desire and anger enter into You. The Unmanifest, the ego, the mind, the elements, and the senses ५७

त्वयि तानि चलेषु त्वं नतेषु त्वं न ते त्वयि एकत्वान् चत्वनानात्वं ये विदुर्यान्ति ते परम् ५८
abide in You, while You are not dependent upon them. You are not in them, nor are they in You. Those who know both unity and multiplicity attain the Supreme. ५८

समोहं सर्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेप्योऽस्ति न प्रियः समत्वमभिकाङ्गन्तम्भक्त्या वै नान्यचेतसः ५९
I am equally disposed toward all beings; there is none whom I hate and none whom I favor. Those who seek this equality through devotion, with their minds directed toward nothing else, ५९

चराचरमिदं सर्वं भूतग्रामञ्चतुर्विधम् त्वया त्वय्येव तत्प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणाइव ६०
all this universe of moving and unmoving beings, the fourfold multitude of creatures, is woven by You and in You, just as a multitude of jewels is strung upon a thread. ६०

स्रष्टो भोक्तासि कूटस्थो ह्यतत्वस्तत्वसंज्ञितः अकर्ता हेतुरचरः पृथगात्मन्यवस्थितः ६१
You are the Creator and the experiencer, the immutable one, called the Reality beyond what is unreal. You are the non-doer, the cause, unmoving, and established separately within the Self. ६१


--- Page 6 ---
      
न मे भूतेषु संयोगो न भूतत्वगुणाधिकः अहङ्कारेण बुद्धया वा न मे योगास्त्रिभिर्गुणैः ६२
I have no association with the elements, nor am I possessed of the qualities belonging to material existence. I have no union with ego or intellect, nor with the three guṇas. ६२

न मे धर्मो ह्यधर्मो वा नामभोजन्नवा पुनः जरामरणमोक्षार्थं त्वां प्रपन्नोस्मि सर्वगः ६३
I have neither dharma nor adharma, nor name, nor food. I have taken refuge in You, the all-pervading One, for liberation from old age and death. ६३

विषयैरिन्द्रियैर्वापि न मे भूयः समागतः ईश्वरोऽसि जगन्नाथ किमतः परमुच्यते ६४
I have no further association with sense objects or with the senses. You are the Lord, O Master of the universe; what can be said beyond this? ६४

भक्तानां यद्धितं देव तद्देहि त्रिदशेश्वर पृथिवीं यातु मे घ्राणं यातु मे रसनञ्जलम् ६५
O Lord of the gods, O Divine One, grant me what is beneficial to Your devotees. May my sense of smell return to the earth, and may my sense of taste return to the waters. ६५

रूपं हुताशनं यातु स्पर्शो यातु च मारुतम् श्रोत्रमाकाशमप्ये तु मनो वैकारिकं पुनः ६६
May sight return to Fire, touch return to Air, hearing return to Space, and may the mind return to its subtle material source. ६६

इन्द्रियाणि गुणान्यातु स्वासु स्वासु च योनिषु पृथिवी यातु सलिलमापोऽग्निमनलोऽनिलम् ६७
May the senses return to their respective sources and qualities. May earth return to water, water to fire, fire to air, ६७

वायुराकाशमप्येतु मनश्चाकाशमेव च अहङ्कारं मनो यातु मोहनं सर्वदेहिनाम् ६८
and may air return to space, and the mind likewise return to space. May the mind return to ego, the deluder of all embodied beings. ६८

अहङ्कारस्तथा बुद्धिं बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च प्रधाने प्रकृतिं याते गुणसाम्ये व्यवस्थिते ६९
May ego return to intellect, intellect to the Unmanifest, and the Unmanifest return to Pradhāna, with Prakṛti established in the equilibrium of the three guṇas. ६९

वियोगः सर्वकरणैर्गुणैर्भूतैश्च मेऽभवत् सत्वं रजस्तमश्चैव प्रकृतिं प्रविशन्तु मे ७०
May I become separated from all the instruments, guṇas, and elements. May sattva, rajas, and tamas enter into Prakṛti. ७०

निष्कैवल्यं पदं देवकांक्षितं परमन्तपः एकीभावस्त्वया मेऽस्तु न मे जन्म भवेत्पुनः ७१
O Lord, may I attain the state of absolute liberation, desired by the gods and supreme ascetics. May I become one with You, and may I never be born again. ७१

नमो भगवते तस्मै विष्णवे प्रभविष्णवे त्वद्वद्धिस्तद्गतप्राणस्त्वद्भक्तस्त्वत्परायणः ७२
Salutations to that Blessed Lord Viṣṇu, the all-powerful One. May my understanding be directed toward You, my life-breath be centered in You, and may I remain devoted to You and wholly devoted to You. ७२

त्वामेवाहं स्मरिष्यामि मरणे पर्युपस्थिते पूर्वदेहिकृता ये मे व्याधयः प्रविशन्तु माम् ७३
I shall remember You alone when death approaches. May the ailments arising from deeds performed in my former body enter into me. ७३

आर्दयन्तु च दुःखानि ऋणं मे न भवेदिति उपदिष्टन्तु मे सर्वे व्याधयः पूर्वचिन्तिताः ७४
May they afflict me with suffering, so that no debt remains upon me. May all those ailments previously contemplated and ordained for me be experienced by me. ७४

--- Page 7 ---
      
अनृणो गन्तुमिच्छामि तद्विष्णोः परमम्पदम् अहं भगवतस्तस्य मम वासः सनातनः ७५
I desire to go, free from all debts, to that supreme abode of Viṣṇu; I am His devotee, and my eternal dwelling is in Him. ७५

तत्याहं न प्रणश्यामि सच मेन प्रणश्यति कर्मेन्द्रियाणि संयम्य पञ्च बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि च ७६
Thus I shall not perish, nor shall He perish from me; having restrained the five organs of action and the five organs of knowledge, ७६

दशेन्द्रियाणि मनसो ह्यहङ्कारेण वा पुनः अहङ्कारं तथा बुद्धौ बुद्धिमात्मनि योजयेत् ७७
one should then withdraw the ten senses into the mind, the mind into the ego, the ego into the intellect, and the intellect into the Self. ७७

आत्मबुद्धीन्द्रियम्पश्येद्बद्धौ बुद्धेः परायणम् ममायमपि तस्याहं येन सर्वमिदन्ततम् ७८
One should perceive the Self through the intellect and the senses, taking the intellect as their supreme support; this self is Mine, and I am His, by whom all this is pervaded. ७८

आत्मनात्मनि संयोज्यममात्मन्यनुसंस्मरेत् एवं बुद्धेः परंबुद्ध्वा लभते न पुनर्भवम् ७९
Having united the Self with the Self, one should continually remember Me within the Self; thus, knowing that which is higher than the intellect, one does not undergo birth again. ७९

ॐ नमो भगवते तस्मै देहिनां परमात्मने नारायणाय भक्तानामेकनिष्ठाय शाश्वते ८०
Om, salutations to that Blessed Lord, the Supreme Self of all embodied beings, to Nārāyaṇa, the eternal One who is the sole refuge of His devotees. ८०

हृदिस्थाय च भूतानां सर्वेषां च महात्मने इमामनुस्मृतिन्दिव्यां वैष्णवीं पापनाशनीम् ८१
Salutations to the Great Self who dwells in the hearts of all beings; this divine Vaiṣṇavī remembrance destroys sins. ८१

स्वयम्विबुद्धश्च पठेद्यत्र तत्र समभ्यसेत् मरणे समनुप्राप्ते यस्त्विमामनुसंस्मरेत् ८२
One should study and practise this wherever one may be, having awakened oneself to its meaning; whoever remembers this at the time of death, ८२

अपि पापममाचारः स याति परमाङ्गतिम् यद्यहङ्कारमाश्रित्य यज्ञदानतपः क्रियाः ८३
even if he has lived a sinful life, attains the supreme state; but if, relying upon ego, one performs sacrifices, charity, austerities, and other acts, ८३

कुर्वस्तत्फलमाप्नोति पुनरावर्तते न तु अभ्यर्चयन् पितृन्देवान् पठन् जुह्णन् बलिन्ददन् ८४
he obtains merely the fruits of those actions and returns again to worldly existence; but one who worships the ancestors and gods, studies the scriptures, performs offerings, and gives the prescribed bali, ८४

ज्वलदग्निं स्मरेद्यो मां लभते परमाङ्गतिम् यज्ञोदानं तपः कर्म पावनानि मनीषिणाम् ८५
and remembers Me as the blazing fire, attains the supreme state. Sacrifice, charity, austerity, and righteous action are purifying for the wise. ८५

यज्ञोदानं तपस्तस्मात्कुर्यादाशाविवर्जितः पौर्णमास्याममावास्यां द्वादश्यां च विशेषतः ८६
Therefore, one should perform sacrifice, charity, and austerity without selfish expectation, especially on the full-moon day, the new-moon day, and the twelfth lunar day. ८६

श्रावयेच्छ्रद्दधानांश्च मद्भक्तांश्च विशेषतः नम इत्येव यो ब्रूयान्मद्भक्तः श्रद्धयान्वितः ८७
One should recite this to those who have faith, and especially to My devotees; whoever, being devoted to Me and endowed with faith, says merely, “Salutations,” ८७


--- Page 8 ---
      
तस्याक्षयो भवेल्लोकः श्वपाकस्यापि नारद किं पुनर्ये यजन्ते मां साधका विधिपूर्वकम् ८८
O Nārada, even the world of a Śvapāka becomes imperishable for him; how much more so for those practitioners who worship Me according to the prescribed rites! ८८

श्रद्धावन्तो यतात्मानस्ते मां यान्ति मदाश्रिताः कर्माण्याद्यन्तवन्तीह मद्भक्तोऽनन्तमश्नुते ८६
Those who are faithful, self-controlled, and take refuge in Me attain Me; actions in this world have a beginning and an end, but My devotee attains the infinite. ८६

मामेव तस्माद्देवर्षे ध्याहि नित्यमतन्द्रितः अवाप्स्यसि तपः सिद्धिं लभ्यसे च पदं मम ९०
Therefore, O divine sage, meditate upon Me alone, constantly and without negligence; you shall attain the perfection of austerity and shall obtain My supreme abode. ९०

अज्ञानामिच्छ्या ज्ञानं दद्याद्धर्मोपदेशनम् कृत्स्त्रां वा पृथिवीं दद्यात्तेन तुल्यं न तत्फलम् ९१
One should impart knowledge to the ignorant through instruction in Dharma; even if one were to give the entire earth as a gift, its merit would not equal that of imparting such knowledge. ९१

अस्मात्प्रदेयं साधुभ्यो जन्मबन्धभयापहम् अश्वमेधसहस्राणां सहस्रं यः समाचरेत् ९२
Therefore, this should be given to the virtuous, for it removes the fear of the bondage of birth; even one who performs a thousand thousands of Aśvamedha sacrifices ९२

नासौ फलमवाप्नोति मद्भक्तैर्यदवाप्यते
does not obtain the fruit that is attained by My devotees.

भीष्म उवाच
Bhīṣma said:

एवं पृष्टः पुरा तेन नारदेन सुरर्षिणा यदुवाच तथा शम्भुस्तदुक्तं तव सुव्रत ९३
Thus questioned in ancient times by Nārada, the divine sage, Śambhu spoke these very words; I have related them to you, O righteous one. ९३

त्वमप्येकमना भूत्वा ध्येयं ज्ञेयं गुणाधिकम् भज सर्वेण भावेन परमात्मानमव्ययम् ९४
You too, becoming single-minded, worship with your whole being the Supreme Imperishable Self, who is worthy of meditation, knowledge, and endowed with supreme qualities. ९४

श्रुत्वैतद् नारदो वाक्यं दिव्यं नारायणेरितम् अत्यन्तभक्तिमान्देवे एकान्तित्वमुपेयिवान् ९५
Hearing these divine words spoken by Nārāyaṇa, Nārada became supremely devoted to the Lord and entered into single-minded devotion to Him. ९५

नारायणमृषीन्देवं दशवर्षाण्यनन्यभाक् इदं जपन्वै प्राप्नोति तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् ९६
One who, being wholly devoted, repeats this for ten years, worshipping Nārāyaṇa, the divine Lord of sages, attains that supreme abode of Viṣṇu. ९६

किं तस्य बहुभिर्मन्त्रैः किं तस्य बहुभिव्रतैः नमो नारायणायेति मन्त्रः सर्वार्थसाधकः ९७
What need has he of many mantras? What need has he of many vows? The mantra “Obeisance to Nārāyaṇa” accomplishes all purposes. ९७

नारायणाय नम ओमिति वेदमन्त्रं-यो नित्यमेव मनसापि समभ्यसेच्च पापैः प्रमुच्य परमे तृषयातिविष्णोः-स्थानं हि सर्वमिति वेदविदो वदन्ति ९८
Whoever constantly practises in the mind even the Vedic mantra “Nārāyaṇāya Namaḥ Om” is freed from sins and reaches the supreme abode of Viṣṇu; the knowers of the Veda declare that everything is indeed the abode of Viṣṇu. ९८


--- Page 9 ---
      
किं तस्य दानैः किं तीर्थैः किं तपोभिः किमध्वरैः यो नित्यं ध्यायते देव नारायण मनन्यधीः ९९
What need has one of charity, pilgrimages, austerities, or sacrifices, if one constantly meditates upon Lord Nārāyaṇa with an undivided mind? ९९

चीरवासा जपी वापि त्रिदण्डी मुण्ड एव वा भूषितो वा द्विजश्रेष्ठ न लिङ्गं धर्मकारणम् १००
Whether one wears a garment of bark, is devoted to japa, carries the threefold staff, is shaven-headed, or adorned with ornaments, O best of the twice-born, external marks are not the cause of Dharma. १००

ये नृशंसा दुरात्मानः पापधर्मविवर्जिताः तेऽपि यान्ति परं स्थानं नारायणपरायणाः १०१
Even those who are cruel and wicked, devoid of righteous conduct and immersed in sinful ways, attain the supreme abode if they are wholly devoted to Nārāyaṇa. १०१

अन्यथा मन्दबुद्धीनां प्रतिभाति दुरात्मनाम् कुतर्कज्ञानदृष्टीनां विश्रान्तेन्द्रियवर्त्मनाम् १०२
Otherwise, this appears differently to the dull-minded and wicked, whose understanding is governed by false reasoning and whose senses have strayed from the proper path. १०२

नमो नारायणायेति ये विदुर्ब्रह्म शाश्वतम् अन्तकाले जपन्नेति तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् १०३
Those who know the eternal Brahman through the mantra “Namo Nārāyaṇāya” and repeat it at the time of death attain that supreme abode of Viṣṇu. १०३

आचारहीनो च मुनिप्रवीर भक्त्या विहीनोऽपि तु विन्दतोऽपि संकीर्त्य नारायणशब्दमात्रं विमुक्तपापो विशतेऽच्युतां गतिम् १०४
O foremost of sages, even one devoid of proper conduct and even one lacking devotion, by merely uttering the word “Nārāyaṇa” becomes freed from sin and enters the imperishable state of Acyuta. १०४

कान्तारवनदुर्गेषु कृत्स्त्रेष्वापत्सु संयुगे दस्युभिः सन्निरोधे च नामभिर्मां प्रकीर्तयेत् १०५
In wildernesses, forests, difficult places, every kind of danger, in battle, or when surrounded by robbers, one should loudly invoke My names. १०५

न दिव्यपुरुषो धीमान् येषु स्थानेषु मां स्मरेत् चौरव्याघ्र महासर्वैः क्रूरैरपि न वाध्यते १०६
The wise and spiritually illumined person who remembers Me in such places is not harmed even by thieves, tigers, great serpents, or other fierce creatures. १०६

जन्मान्तरसहस्त्रेषु तपोध्यानसमाधिभिः नराणां क्षीणपापानां कृष्णे भक्तिः प्रजायते १०७
After thousands of births, through austerity, meditation, and samādhi, devotion to Kṛṣṇa arises in those whose sins have been exhausted. १०७

नामास्ति याति शक्तिश्च पापे निर्हरणे हरेः श्वपचोऽपि नरः कर्तुं क्षमस्तावन्न किल्बिषम् १०८
The name of Hari possesses the power to remove sin; even a Śvapāka, a person regarded as extremely low-born, becomes capable of being freed from sin through it. १०८

न तावत्पापमस्तीह यावन्नामहतं हरेः अतिरेक भयादाहुः प्रायश्चित्तान्तरं बुधाः १०९
There is no sin so great that it cannot be destroyed by Hari's name; only out of fear of its immense power do the wise speak of other forms of expiation. १०९

गत्वा गत्वा निवर्तन्ते चन्द्रसूर्यादयो ग्रहाः अद्यापि न निवर्तन्ते द्वादशाक्षरचिन्तकाः ११०
The planets, including the Moon and the Sun, repeatedly go forth and return, but those who contemplate the twelve-syllabled mantra do not return. ११०

न वासुदेवात्परमस्ति मङ्गलं न वासुदेवात्परमस्ति पावनम् न वासुदेवात्परमस्ति दैवतं न वासुदेवं प्रणिपत्य सीदति १११
There is nothing more auspicious than Vāsudeva; there is nothing more purifying than Vāsudeva; there is no deity higher than Vāsudeva; one who bows down to Vāsudeva never falls into sorrow. १११

इमां रहस्यां परमामनुस्मृतिं ह्यधीत्य बुद्धिं लभते च नैष्ठिकम् विहाय दुःखानि विमुच्य सङ्कटात् स वीतरागो विचरेन्महीमिमाम् ११२
Having studied this supreme and secret Anusmṛti, one attains steadfast understanding; abandoning sorrow and becoming freed from difficulties, one who is free from attachment wanders upon this earth. ११२

गङ्गायां मरणं चैव दृढा भक्तिश्च केशवे ब्रह्मविद्याप्रबोधश्च नाल्पस्य तपसः फलम् ११३
Death on the banks of the Ganges, unwavering devotion to Keśava, and awakening to the knowledge of Brahman are not the fruits of little austerity. ११३

इति विष्णुस्मृतिः समाप्ता
