--- Page 1 ---
अथ वेदव्यासस्मृतिः श्रीगणेशाय नमः
प्रथमोऽध्यायः
अथ धर्माचरणादेशप्रयुक्तवर्णषोडशसंस्कारवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the sixteen saṃskāras according to the varṇas, prescribed for the observance of Dharma.

वाराणस्यां सुखासीनं वेदव्यासं तपोनिधिम् पप्रच्छुर्मुनयोऽभ्येत्य धर्मान् वर्णव्यवस्थितान् १
The sages approached Vedavyāsa, the treasure-house of austerities, who was comfortably seated in Vārāṇasī, and asked him about the duties prescribed according to the varṇas. १

स पृष्टः स्मृतिमान् स्मृत्वा स्मृतिं वेदार्थगर्भिताम् उवाचाथ प्रसन्नात्मा मुनयः श्रूयतामिति २
Thus questioned, he recalled the Smṛti containing the essence of the meaning of the Veda and, with a serene mind, said: “O sages, listen.” २

यत्र यत्र स्वभावेन कृष्णसारो मृगः सदा चरते तत्र वेदोक्तो धर्मो भवितुं मर्हति ३
Wherever the black antelope naturally and habitually roams, there the Dharma prescribed by the Vedas is fit to be observed. ३

शुरिस्मृतिपुराणानां विरोधो यत्र दृश्यते तत्र श्रौतं प्रमाणन्तु तयोर्दैधे स्मृतिर्वरा ४
Wherever a contradiction is found among Śruti, Smṛti, and Purāṇas, Śruti is authoritative; where the two are in doubt, Smṛti is superior.

ब्राह्मणःक्षत्रियोवैश्यस्त्रयो वर्णा द्विजातयः श्रुतिस्मृतिपुराणोक्तधर्मयोग्यास्तु नेतरे ५
Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas are the three twice-born varṇas; they alone are entitled to the Dharma prescribed by Śruti, Smṛti, and Purāṇas, and not the others. ५

शूद्रोवर्णश्चतुर्थोऽपि वर्णत्वाद्धर्ममर्हति वेदमन्त्रस्वधास्वाहावषट्कारादिभिर्विना ६
The Śūdra, though the fourth varṇa, is also entitled to Dharma by virtue of being a varṇa, but without Vedic mantras, Svadhā, Svāhā, Vaṣaṭkāra, and the like. ६

विप्रवद्विप्रविन्नासु क्षत्रविन्नासु विप्रवत् जातकर्माणि कुर्वीत ततः शूद्रासु शूद्रवत् ७
For sons born of Brāhmaṇa women, the Jātakarma rites should be performed as for a Brāhmaṇa; for those born of Kṣatriya women, as for a Kṣatriya; and thereafter, for Śūdra women, as for a Śūdra. ७

वैश्यासु विप्रक्षत्त्राभ्यां ततः शूद्रासु शूद्रवत् अधमादुत्तमायान्तु जातः शूद्राधमः स्मृतः ८
For those born of Brāhmaṇas and Kṣatriyas from Vaiśya women, and thereafter from Śūdra women, the rites should be performed as for a Śūdra. One born from a lower varṇa by a higher varṇa is regarded as the lowest among Śūdras. ८

ब्राह्मण्यां शूद्रजनितश्चाण्डालो धर्मवर्जितः कुमारीसम्भवस्त्वेकः सगोत्रायां द्वितीयकः ९
A child begotten by a Śūdra upon a Brāhmaṇa woman is a Cāṇḍāla and is devoid of Dharma. One born from an unmarried maiden is one kind, and one born from a woman of the same gotra is another. ९

ब्राह्मण्यां शूद्रजनितश्चाण्डालस्त्रिविधः स्मृतः वर्द्धकी नापितो गोप आशापः कुम्भकारकः १०
The Cāṇḍāla born from a Śūdra and a Brāhmaṇa woman is said to be of three kinds. The carpenter, barber, cowherd, Āśāpa, and potter are [among those described here].

वणिकिरातकायस्थमालाकारकुटम्बिनः एते चान्ये च वहवः शूद्रा भिन्नः स्वकर्मभिः
The merchant, Kirāta, Kāyastha, garland-maker, cultivator, and many others are Śūdras, distinguished from one another by their respective occupations.

--- Page 2 ---

चर्मकारो भटो भिल्लो रजकः पुष्करो नटः वरटोमेदचण्डालदासस्वपचकोलकाः ११
The leather-worker, soldier, Bhilla, washerman, Puṣkara, actor, Varaṭa, Meda, Cāṇḍāla, Dāsa, Svapaca, and Kolaka are [among those described here]. ११

एतेऽन्त्यजाः समाख्याता ये चान्ये च गवाशनाः एषां सम्भाषणात् स्त्रानं दर्शनादर्कवीक्षाणम् १२
These are known as Antyajas, along with others who eat cows. After conversing with them, one should bathe; upon seeing them, one should look at the sun. १२

गर्भाधानं पुंसवनं सीमन्तो जातकर्म च नामक्रिया निष्क्रमणेऽन्नाशनं वपनक्रिया १३
Garbhādhāna, Puṃsavana, Sīmantonnayana, Jātakarma, Nāmakaraṇa, Niṣkramaṇa, Annaprāśana, and Vapanakriyā are [the saṃskāras]. १३

कर्णवेधो व्रतादेशो वेदारम्भक्रियाविधिः केशान्तः स्त्रानमुद्वाहो विवाहाग्निपरिग्रहः १४
Karṇavedha, the initiation into the vow, the rite of beginning Vedic study, Keśānta, bathing, marriage, and the establishment of the marriage fire are [the saṃskāras]. १४

त्रेताग्निसंग्रहश्चेति संस्काराः षोडश स्मृताः नवताः कर्णवेधान्ता मन्त्रवर्ज क्रियाः स्त्रियाः १५
The collection of the three sacred fires is the sixteenth; thus sixteen saṃskāras are remembered. For women, the rites up to Karṇavedha are performed without mantras. १५

विवाहो मन्त्रतस्तस्याः शूद्रस्यामन्त्रतो दश गर्भाधानं प्रथमतस्तृतीये मासि पुंसवः १६
For her, marriage is performed with mantras; for a Śūdra woman, it is performed without mantras. The ten [saṃskāras] begin with Garbhādhāna; Puṃsavana is performed in the third month. १६

सीमन्तश्चाष्टमे मासि जाते जातक्रिया भवेत् एकादशेऽह्नि नामार्कस्येक्षा मासि चतुर्थके १७
Sīmantonnayana is performed in the eighth month; after birth, the Jātakarma rite is performed. On the eleventh day, the naming ceremony is performed, and in the fourth month the child is taken out to see the sun. १७

षाष्ठे मास्यान्नमश्नीयाच्चूडाकर्म कुलोचितम् कृतचूडे च बाले च कर्नबेधो विधीयते १८
In the sixth month, the child should eat solid food for the first time, and the Cūḍākarman should be performed according to family custom. After the Cūḍā ceremony has been performed, Karṇavedha is prescribed for the child. १८

विप्रो गर्भाष्टमे वर्षे क्षत्त्रमेकादशे तथा द्वादशे वैश्यजातिस्तु व्रतोपनयनक्रिया १९
For a Brāhmaṇa, the initiation into the vow and Upanayana should be performed in the eighth year from conception; for a Kṣatriya, in the eleventh year; and for a Vaiśya, in the twelfth year. १९

तस्य प्राप्तव्रतस्यायं कालः स्यात् द्विगुणाधिकः वेदव्रतच्युतो व्रात्यः स व्रात्यस्तोममर्हति २०
The period allowed for one who has reached the proper age for the vow extends to twice that time; one who has fallen away from the Vedic vow is called a Vrātya and is entitled to perform the Vrātyastoma. २०

द्वे जन्मनी द्विजातीनां मातुः स्यात् प्रथमं तयोः द्वितीयं छन्दसां मातुर्ग्रहणाद्विधिवद्गुरोः २१
The twice-born have two births. The first of these is from the mother, and the second is from the mother of the Vedas—the Chandas—through the proper acceptance of the guru. २१

एवं द्विजातिमापन्नो विमुक्तो वाल्यदोषतः श्रुतिस्मृतिपुराणानां भवेदध्ययनक्षमः २२
Having thus attained the status of a twice-born and being freed from the defects of childhood, he becomes qualified to study Śruti, Smṛti, and Purāṇas. २२

उपनीतो गुरुकुले वसेन्नित्यं समाहितः विभृयाद्दण्डकौपीनोपवीताजिनमेखलाः २३
After Upanayana, he should live in the guru's household, always disciplined and attentive, and should wear the staff, loincloth, sacred thread, deerskin, and girdle. २३


--- Page 3 ---

पुण्येऽह्नि गुर्वनुज्ञातः कृतमन्त्राहुतिक्रियः स्मृत्वोङ्कारञ्च गायत्रीमारभेद्वेदमादितः २४
On an auspicious day, with the permission of the guru and after performing the prescribed mantra-offering ritual, he should remember Oṃkāra and Gāyatrī and begin the study of the Veda from the beginning. २४

शौचाचारविचारार्थं धर्मशास्त्रमपि द्विजः पठेत गुरुतः सम्यक् कर्म तद्दिष्टमाचरेत् २५
For understanding purity, proper conduct, and right behaviour, the twice-born should also study the Dharmaśāstra from the guru and properly perform the duties prescribed by him. २५

ततोऽभिवाद्य स्थविरान् गुरुञ्चैव समाश्रयेत् स्पाध्यायार्थं तदा यत्नः सर्वदा हितमाचरेत् २६
Thereafter, he should respectfully salute the elders and take refuge in the guru; he should then diligently engage in self-study and always conduct himself for the welfare of all. २६

नापक्षिप्तोऽपि भाषेत नोव्रजेत्ताडितोऽपि वा विद्वेषमथ पैशुन्यं हिंसनञ्चार्कवीक्षणम् २७
Even when insulted, he should not speak harshly, nor should he go away even when struck. He should avoid hatred, slander, violence, and staring at the sun. २७

तौर्यत्रिकानृतोन्मादपरिवादानलङ्कियाम् अञ्जनोद्वर्त्तनादर्शस्रग्विलेपनयोषितः २८
He should avoid theatrical performances involving singing, instrumental music and dancing, falsehood, intoxication, slander, adornment, collyrium, anointing the body, looking into mirrors, wearing garlands, perfumes, and women. २८

वृथाटनमसन्तोषं ब्रह्मचारी विवर्जयेत् ईषच्चलितमध्याह्नेऽनुज्ञातो गुरुणा स्वयम् २९
A Brahmacārin should avoid wandering about without purpose and discontent. At midday, he should go out only slightly from the proper path and only with the guru's permission. २९

आलोलुपश्चरेद्वैक्षं व्रतिषूत्तमवृत्तिषु सद्यो भिक्षान्नमादाय वित्तवत्तदुपस्पृशेत् ३०
Without greed, he should seek alms among those who observe the highest forms of religious conduct; having immediately received the alms-food, he should present it to the guru. ३०

कृतमाध्याह्निकोऽश्नीयादनुज्ञातो यथाविधि नाद्यादेकान्नमुच्छिष्टं भुक्त्वा चाचामितामियात् ३१
After completing the midday rites, he should eat according to the prescribed rule with permission. He should not eat food belonging to only one person, nor food that has been left over; after eating, he should perform ācamana. ३१

नान्यद्भिक्षितमादद्यादापन्नो द्रविणादिकम् अनिन्द्यामन्त्रितः श्राद्धे पैत्र्येऽदद्याद्गुरुचोदितः ३२
He should not accept anything other than what has been received as alms. In times of distress, he may accept wealth and other necessities. If invited without anything blameworthy to a Śrāddha for the ancestors, he should give the offering as directed by the guru. ३२

एकान्न मप्यविरोधे व्रतानां प्रथमाश्रमी भुक्त्वा गुरुमुपासीत कृत्वा सन्धुक्षणादिकम् ३३
The first-stage āśrama student should eat even food belonging to a single person when it does not conflict with his vows, and thereafter attend upon the guru after performing the rites such as kindling the sacred fire. ३३

समिधोऽग्नावादधीत ततः परिचरेद्गुरुम् अधीतगुर्वनुज्ञातः प्रह्नश्च प्रथमं गुरोः ३४
He should place the fuel sticks into the sacred fire and then serve the guru. After completing his study and obtaining the guru's permission, he should first salute the guru. ३४

एवमन्वहमभ्यासी ब्रह्मचारी व्रतञ्चरेत् हितोपवादः प्रियवाक् सम्यग्गुर्वर्थसाधकः ३५
Thus practising every day, the Brahmacārin should observe his vow, give beneficial instruction, speak pleasantly, and properly accomplish what is required for the guru. ३५

नित्यमाराधयेदेनमा समाप्तेः श्रुतिग्रहात् अनेन विधिनाऽधीतो वेदमन्त्रो द्विजं नयेत् ३६
He should worship and serve the guru every day until the completion of his study. The Vedic mantras studied according to this procedure should lead the twice-born to the proper spiritual attainment. ३६


--- Page 4 ---

शापानुग्रहसामर्थ्यमृषीणाञ्च सलोकताम् पयोऽमृताभ्यां मधुभिः साज्यैः प्रीणन्ति देवताः ३७
The sages possess the power to curse and to bestow blessings, and the ability to attain the same world as the gods. The deities are pleased with milk, nectar, honey, and preparations mixed with ghee. ३७

तस्मादहरहर्वेदमनध्यायमृते पठेत् यदङ्गं तदनध्याये गुरोर्वचनमाचरेत् ३८
Therefore, one should study the Veda every day except during the prescribed periods of non-study. During the period of non-study of any particular Vedic branch, one should follow the guru's instructions. ३८

व्यतिक्रमादसम्पूर्णमनहंकृतिराचरेत् परत्रेह च तद्ब्रह्म अनधीतमपि द्विजम् यस्तूपनयनादेतदामृत्योर्त्रतमाचरेत् ३९
If there is a transgression, the incomplete observance should be performed without ego. That Brahman, even if not fully studied, leads the twice-born to welfare here and hereafter. Whoever observes this discipline from Upanayana until death, ३९

स नैष्ठिको ब्रह्मचारी ब्रह्मसायुज्यमाप्नुयात् उपकुर्वाणकोयस्तु द्विजः षड्विंशवार्षिकः ४०
is a lifelong Brahmacārin and attains union with Brahman. But the twice-born who follows the Upakurvāṇa form of Brahmacarya remains so until the age of twenty-six. ४०

केशान्तकर्मणा तत्र यथोक्तचरितव्रतः समाप्य वेदान् वेदौ वा वेदं वा प्रसभं द्विजः ४१
Thereafter, having performed the Keśānta ceremony and having observed the prescribed vows and conduct, the twice-born should complete the study of the Vedas, whether two Vedas or one Veda, ४१

स्त्रायीत गुर्वनुज्ञातः प्रवृत्तोदितदक्षिणः
and, with the guru's permission and after offering the prescribed dakṣiṇā, should take the ceremonial bath.

इति श्रीवेदव्यासीये धर्मशास्त्रे ब्रह्मचर्याधिकारो नाम प्रथमोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the first chapter, entitled “The Discipline of Brahmacarya,” in the Dharmaśāstra attributed to Vedavyāsa.

द्वितीयोऽध्यायः अथ विवाहविधिवर्णनम्
The Second Chapter: Now begins the description of the procedure of marriage.

एवं स्नातकतां प्राप्तो द्वितीयाश्रमकाङ्गया प्रतीक्षेत विवाहाथमनिन्द्यान्वयसम्भवाम् १
Having thus attained the status of a Snātaka, and desiring to enter the second āśrama, he should seek a bride born in a blameless family for marriage. १

अरोगादुष्टवंशोत्थामशुल्कादानदूषिताम् सवर्णामसमानार्षाममातृपितृगोत्रजाम् २
She should be free from disease, born of an unblemished family, not tainted by the taking of a bride-price, belonging to the same varṇa, but not of the same ṛṣi lineage, and not born from the same maternal or paternal gotra. २

अनन्यपूर्विकां लघ्वीं शुभलक्षणसंयुताम् धृताधोवसनां गौरीं विख्यातदशपूरुषाम् ३
She should be unmarried previously, of a suitable age and endowed with auspicious characteristics, modestly clothed below, fair-complexioned, and belonging to a family renowned for ten generations. ३

ख्यातनाम्नः पुत्रवतः सदाचारवतः सतः दातुमिच्छोर्दुहितरं प्राप्य धर्मेण चोद्वहेत् ४
Having found the daughter of a man of good reputation, who has sons and follows righteous conduct, and who desires to give his daughter in marriage, he should marry her according to Dharma. ४

ब्राह्मोद्वाहविधानेन तदभावेऽपरो विधिः दातव्यैषा सदृक्षाय वयोविद्यान्वयादिभिः ५
The marriage should be performed according to the Brāhma marriage procedure; if that is not possible, another prescribed procedure may be followed. The girl should be given to a suitable man equal to her in age, learning, lineage, and other qualities. ५


--- Page 5 ---

पितृतत्पितृभ्रातृषु पितृव्यज्ञातिमातृषु पूर्वाभावे परो दद्यात् सर्वाभावे स्वयं व्रजेत् ६
In the absence of the father, the paternal grandfather, paternal brother, paternal uncle, paternal relatives, or maternal relatives should give the girl in marriage, in that order. If all of them are absent, she should proceed on her own. ६

यदि सा दातृवैकल्याद्रजः पश्येत् कुमारिका भ्रूणहत्याश्च यावत्यः पतितः स्यात्तदप्रदः ७
If the maiden reaches menstruation because of the failure of those responsible for giving her in marriage, the person who failed to give her away becomes fallen and incurs the sin equivalent to that of the killing of a fetus. ७

तुभ्यं दास्याम्यहमिति ग्रहीष्यामीति यस्तयोः कृत्वा समयमन्योन्यं भजते न स दण्डभाक् ८
If a man and woman mutually make an agreement, saying, “I shall give [her] to you” and “I shall accept [her],” and thereafter unite with each other, neither of them is liable to punishment. ८

त्यजन्नदुष्टां दण्ड्यः स्याद्दूषयंश्चाप्यदूषिताम् तावन्न दुष्टं दुष्टं च स्वार्थेभ्यो भेदयंश्च तत् ऊढायां हि सवर्णायामन्या वा काममुद्वहेत् ९
One who abandons an undefiled woman is liable to punishment, and likewise one who corrupts an undefiled woman. He should not distinguish between what is pure and impure according to his own interests. After marrying a woman of the same varṇa, he may, if he wishes, marry another woman as well. ९

तस्यामुत्पादितः पुत्रो न सवर्णात् प्रहीयते १०
A son born from her is not considered inferior to a son born from a woman of the same varṇa. १०

उद्वहेत् क्षत्त्रियां विप्रो वैश्याञ्च क्षत्त्रियो विशाम् न तु शूद्रां द्विजः कश्चिन्नाधमः पूर्ववर्णजाम् ११
A Brāhmaṇa may marry a Kṣatriya woman, and a Kṣatriya may marry a Vaiśya woman; but no twice-born man should marry a Śūdra woman, nor should he marry a woman belonging to a lower varṇa. ११

नानावर्णासु भार्यासु सवर्णा सहचारिणी धर्म्या धर्मेषु धर्मिष्ठा ज्येष्ठा तस्य स्वजातिषु १२
When a man has wives of different varṇas, the wife of his own varṇa is his principal companion, the proper wife for religious duties, and the foremost among his wives of the same social order. १२

पाटितोऽयं द्विजाः पूर्वमेकदेहः स्वयम्भुवा पतयोऽर्द्धन चार्द्धन पत्न्योऽभूवन्निति श्रुतिः १३
O twice-born, in the beginning, the Self-born divided this [being] into two parts, and the Śruti declares that husbands became one half and wives the other half. १३

यावन्न विन्दते जायां तावदर्द्धा भवेत् पुमान् नार्द्ध प्रजायते सर्वं प्रजायेतेत्यपि श्रुतिः १४
Until a man obtains a wife, he remains only half a person; he does not become complete until offspring are born. Thus also declares the Śruti. १४

गुर्वी सा भूस्त्रिवर्गस्य वोढं नान्येन शक्यते यतस्ततोऽन्वहं भूत्वा स्ववशो बिभृयाच्च ताम् १५
She is the great foundation of the three aims of life—Dharma, Artha, and Kāma—and cannot be properly supported by another; therefore, having taken her as his wife, he should faithfully maintain her every day according to his means. १५

कृतदारोऽग्निपत्नीभ्यां कृतवेश्मा गृहं वसेत् स्वकृत्यं वित्तमासाद्य वैतानाग्निं न हापयेत् १६
Having taken a wife and established the household fires, he should reside in his own home. Having obtained the wealth necessary for his duties, he should not neglect the Vaitāna fire. १६

स्मार्तं वैवाहिके वह्नौ श्रौतं वैतानिकाग्निषु कर्म कुर्यात् प्रतिदिनं विधिवत् प्रीतिपूर्वतः १७
He should perform the Smārta rites in the marital fire and the Śrauta rites in the Vaitānika fires every day according to the prescribed procedure and with devotion. १७

सम्यग्धर्मार्थकामेषु दम्पतिभ्यामहर्निशम् एकचित्ततया भाव्यं समानव्रतवृत्तितः १८
The husband and wife should, day and night, remain united in one mind regarding Dharma, Artha, and Kāma, observing the same vows and conduct. १८



--- Page 6 ---

न पृथग्विद्यते स्त्रीणां त्रिवर्गविधिसाधनम् भावतो ह्यतिदेशाद्वा इति शास्त्रविधिः परः १९
There is no separate means prescribed for women for attaining the three aims of life—Dharma, Artha, and Kāma. Whether by implication or by extension of the rules applicable to their husbands, this is the supreme ordinance of the scriptures. १९

पत्युः पूर्वं समुत्थाय देहशुद्धिं विधाय च उत्थाप्य शयनाद्यानि कृत्वा वेश्मविशोधनम् २०
Rising before her husband and performing bodily purification, she should put away the bedding and related items and then cleanse the house. २०

मार्जनैर्लेपनैः प्राप्य साग्निशालं स्वमङ्गनम् शोधयेदग्निकार्याणि स्त्रिग्धान्युष्णेन वारिणा २१
By sweeping and smearing, she should purify the courtyard and the fire-room, and cleanse the implements used for the sacred fire with warm water. २१

प्रोक्षण्यैरिति तान्येव यथास्थनं प्रकल्पयेत् द्वन्द्वपात्राणि सर्वाणि न कदाचिद्वियोजयेत् २२
After sprinkling them with water for purification, she should arrange them in their proper places. Paired vessels should never be separated. २२

शोधयित्वा तु पात्राणि पूरयित्वा तु धारयेत् महानसस्य पात्राणि बहिः प्रक्षाल्य सर्वथा २३
Having cleansed the vessels, she should fill and keep them ready. The utensils of the kitchen should always be thoroughly washed outside. २३

मृद्भिश्च शोधयेच्चल्लीं तत्राग्निं विन्यसेत्ततः स्मृत्वा नियोगपात्राणि रसांश्च द्रविणानि च २४
She should purify the hearth with clay and then establish the fire there, arranging the required vessels, condiments, and provisions. २४

कृतपूर्वाह्णकार्या च स्वगुरूनभिवादयेत् ताभ्यां भर्तृपितृभ्यां वा भ्रातृमातुलबान्धवैः २५
Having completed the morning duties, she should pay respects to her elders, including her husband, father, brothers, maternal uncles, and other relatives. २५

वस्त्रालङ्काररत्नानि प्रदत्तान्येव धारयेत् मनोवाक्कर्मभिः शुद्धा पतिदेशानुवर्तिनी २६
She should wear only those garments, ornaments, and jewels that have been given to her. Pure in thought, speech, and action, she should follow the instructions of her husband. २६

छायेवानुगता स्वच्छा सखीव हितकर्मसु दासीवादिष्टकार्येषु भार्या भर्तुः सदा भवेत् २७
A wife should always be like a shadow following her husband, pure in conduct, like a friend in beneficial actions, and like a servant in carrying out the tasks assigned by him. २७

ततोऽन्नसाधनं कृत्वा पतये विनिवेद्य तत् वैश्वदेवकृतैरन्नैर्भोजनीयांश्च भोजयेत् २८
Thereafter, having prepared the food, she should present it to her husband; after the Vaiśvadeva offering has been made, she should feed those who are to be fed. २८

पतिञ्चैतदनुज्ञाता शिष्टमन्वाद्यमात्मना भुक्त्वा नयेदहःशेषमायव्ययविचिन्तया २९
Having obtained her husband's permission, she should eat the remaining food and spend the rest of the day considering the household's income and expenditure. २९

पुनः सायं पुनः प्रातर्गृहशुद्धिं विधाय च ३०
Again in the evening and again in the morning, she should perform the purification of the house. ३०

कृतान्नसाधना साध्वी मुभृशं भोजयेत् पतिम् नातितृप्तया स्वयं भुक्त्वा गृहनीतिं विधाय च ३१
Having prepared the food, the virtuous wife should carefully feed her husband. Without indulging herself excessively, she should then eat and continue to manage the household properly. ३१


--- Page 7 ---

आस्तीर्य साधुशयनं ततः परिचरेत् पतिम्
Having properly arranged the bed, she should then attend upon her husband.

सुप्ते पतौ तदभ्यासे स्वपेत्तद्गतमानसा अनग्मा चाप्रमत्ता च निष्कामा च जितेन्द्रिया ३२
When her husband has fallen asleep, she too should sleep near him, keeping her mind devoted to him, free from wrongdoing, vigilant, free from desire, and with her senses under control. ३२

नोच्चैर्वदेन्न परुषं न बहून् पत्युरप्रियम् न केनचित् विवदेच्च अप्रलापविलापिनी ३३
She should not speak loudly or harshly, nor say many things displeasing to her husband. She should not quarrel with anyone and should refrain from idle or lamenting speech. ३३

नचातिव्ययशीला स्यान्न धर्मार्थविरोधिनी प्रमादोन्मादरोषेर्ष्यावञ्चनञ्चातिमानिताम् ३४
She should not be excessively extravagant or act contrary to Dharma and Artha. She should avoid negligence, madness, anger, jealousy, deceit, and excessive pride. ३४

पैशुन्यहिंसाविद्वेषमहाहङ्कारधूर्त्तताः नास्तिक्यसाहसस्तेयदम्भान् साध्वी विवर्जयेत् ३५
A virtuous woman should avoid slander, violence, hatred, excessive ego, deceitfulness, disbelief, reckless behaviour, theft, and hypocrisy. ३५

एवं परिचरन्ती सा पतिं परमदैवतम् यशः शमिह यात्येव परत्र च सलोकताम् ३६
By thus serving her husband as her supreme deity, she attains fame and peace in this world and, in the hereafter, attains the same world as him. ३६

योषितो नित्यकर्मोक्तं नैमित्तिकमथोच्यते रजोदर्शनतोदोषात् सर्वमेव परित्यजेत् ३७
The daily duties prescribed for women have been described; now their occasional duties are explained. From the onset of menstruation, she should abandon all such activities because of the prescribed impurity. ३७

सर्वेरलक्षिता शीघ्रं लज्जिताऽन्तगृहे वसेत् एकाम्बरावृता दीना स्त्रानालङ्कारवर्जिता ३८
She should quickly withdraw from the sight of everyone and, remaining modest, stay inside the house. She should be covered with a single garment, remain humble, and abstain from bathing and adornment. ३८

मौनिन्यधोमुखी चक्षुष्पाणिपद्भिरचञ्चला अश्नीयात् केवलं भक्तं नक्तं मृण्मयभाजने ३९
She should remain silent, with her face lowered and her eyes, hands, and feet restrained and still. At night she should eat only plain cooked rice from an earthen vessel. ३९

स्वपेद्भूमावप्रमत्ता क्षपेदेवमहस्त्रयम् स्त्रायीत सा त्रिरात्रान्ते सचैलमुदिते रवौ ४०
She should sleep on the ground, remain vigilant, and spend three days in this manner. At the end of the three nights, she should bathe with her clothes on after sunrise. ४०

विलोक्य भर्तुर्वदनं शुद्धा भवति धर्मतः कृतशौचा पुनः कर्म पूर्ववच्च समाचरेत् ४१
After looking upon her husband's face, she becomes ritually pure according to Dharma. Having completed the purification rites, she should resume her duties as before. ४१

रजोदर्शनतो याः स्यू रात्रयः षोडशर्त्तवः ततः पुंबीजमाक्लिष्टं शुद्धे क्षेत्रे प्ररोहति ४२
The sixteen nights following the onset of menstruation constitute the fertile period; during this time the undisturbed male seed may develop in the purified field. ४२

चतस्रश्चादिमा रात्रीः पर्ववच्च विवर्जयेत् गच्छेद्युग्मासु रात्रीषु पौष्णपित्रक्षराक्षसान् ४३
The first four nights should be avoided, as should the prohibited days. On the even-numbered nights, she may unite with her husband, avoiding the nights associated with Puṣya, the ancestors, and the Rākṣasa-related periods. ४३

प्रच्छादितादित्यपथे पुमान् गच्छेत् स्वयोषितः कामालङ्कदवाप्नोति पुत्रं पूजितलक्षणम् ४४
When the husband approaches his own wife at a time when the path of the sun is covered, according to the prescribed rule, he obtains, through desire, a son endowed with honoured and auspicious characteristics. ४४


--- Page 8 ---

ऋतुकालेऽभिगम्यैवं ब्रह्मचर्ये व्यवस्थितः गच्छन्नपि यथाकामं न दुष्टः स्यादनन्यकृत् ४५
During the ṛtu period, having approached his wife in this manner and remaining disciplined in Brahmacarya, even if he approaches her according to his desire, he does not become impure, provided he has no other woman.

भ्रूणहत्यामवाप्नोति ऋतौ भार्यापराङ्गखः सा त्ववप्यान्यतो गर्भ त्याज्या भवति पापिनी ४६
A husband who turns away from his wife during her ṛtu period incurs the sin of killing a fetus. If she conceives a child from another man, she becomes sinful and should be abandoned.

महापातकदुष्टा च पतिगर्भविनाशिनी सद्धत्तचारिणीं पत्नीं त्यक्त्वा पतति धर्मतः ४७
A wife who is tainted by a great sin and destroys her husband's offspring causes him to fall from Dharma if he continues to retain her instead of abandoning her.

महापातकदुष्टोऽपि नाप्रतीक्ष्यस्तया पतिः अशुद्धे क्षयमादूरं स्थितायामनुचिन्तया ४८
Even when the husband is afflicted by a great sin, she should not fail to wait upon him. When he is impure, she should remain at a distance and patiently await his purification.

व्यभिचारेण दुष्टानां पतीनां दर्शनादृते धिक्कृतायामवाच्यायामन्यत्र वासयेत् पतिः ४९
A wife whose husband has become corrupted through adultery should, except for seeing him, remain separate from him; if she has become blameworthy and beyond acceptable conduct, the husband should make her reside elsewhere.

पुनस्तामार्त्तवस्त्रातां पूर्ववद् व्यवहारयेत् धूर्त्ताञ्च धर्मकामघ्नीमपुत्रां दीर्घरोगिणीम् ५०
After she has completed her menstrual period and undergone purification, he should treat her as before. But a deceitful woman, one who destroys Dharma and desire, one who is childless, or one suffering from a prolonged illness,

सुदुष्टां व्यसनासक्तामहितामधिवासयेत् अधिविन्नामपि विभुः स्त्रीणान्तु समतामियात् ५१
who is extremely corrupt, addicted to harmful habits, or hostile, should be made to live separately. Even when he takes another wife, the husband should maintain equality among his wives.

विवर्णा दीनवदना देहसंस्कारवर्जिता पतिव्रता निराहारा शोष्यते प्रोषिते पतौ ५२
A devoted wife, when her husband is away, should remain without adornment of the body, with a pale and sorrowful face, and without food, becoming emaciated.

मृतं भर्त्तारमादाय ब्राह्मणी वह्निमाविशेत् जीवन्ती चेत्यक्तकेशा तपसा शोधयेद्वपुः ५३
A Brāhmaṇa woman should enter the fire after taking her deceased husband with her; if she remains alive, she should renounce her hair and purify her body through austerity.

सर्वावस्थासु नारीणां न युक्तं स्यादरक्षणम् तदेवानुक्रमात् कार्यं पितृभर्तृसुतादिभिः ५४
In all circumstances, women should not be left without protection; according to the proper order, this protection should be provided by the father, husband, sons, and others.

जाताः सुरक्षिताया ये पुत्रपौत्रप्रपौत्रकाः ये यजन्ति पितृन् यज्ञैर्मोक्षप्राप्तिमहोदयः ५५
The sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons born to a protected woman perform sacrifices for their ancestors, through which the great attainment of liberation is brought about.

मृतानामग्निहोत्रेण दाहयेद्विधिपूर्वकम् दाहयेदविलम्बेन भार्याञ्चात्र व्रजेत् सा ५६
The dead should be cremated with the Agnihotra fire according to the prescribed procedure. The wife too should be cremated without delay, and she should proceed to the same destination.

इति श्रीवेदव्यासीये धर्मशास्त्रे रूयधिकारोनाम द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the second chapter, entitled “The Discipline of Marriage,” in the Dharmaśāstra attributed to Vedavyāsa.


--- Page 9 ---

तृतीयोऽध्यायः
The Third Chapter

अथ सस्स्रानादिविधि पूर्वाह्णकृत्यवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of the procedure of bathing and the duties to be performed in the forenoon.

नित्यं नैमित्तिकं काम्यमिति कर्म त्रिधा मतम् त्रिविधं तच्च वक्ष्यामि गृहस्थस्यावधार्यताम् १
The prescribed duties are considered to be of three kinds: daily, occasional, and desired. I shall now explain these three; let the householder understand them carefully. १

यामिन्याः पश्चिमे यामे त्यक्तनिद्रो हरिं स्मरेत् आलोक्य मङ्गलद्रव्यं कर्मावश्यकमाचरेत् २
In the last part of the night, having abandoned sleep, he should remember Hari. After looking upon auspicious objects, he should perform the necessary morning duties. २

कृतशौचो निषेव्याग्निं दन्तान् प्रक्ष्याल्य वारिणा स्त्रात्वोपास्य द्विजः सन्ध्यां देवादींश्चैव तर्पयेत् ३
Having completed purification, attended to the sacred fire, and washed his teeth with water, the twice-born should bathe, perform the Sandhyā worship, and offer libations to the deities and others. ३

जुहोत्यनुदिते भानावित्येक उदिते रवौ जपेदादित्यदेवत्यान्मन्त्रान्मन्त्रनियोगवित् वेदवेदाङ्गशास्त्राणि इतिहासानि चाभ्यसेत् अध्यापयेच्च सच्छिष्यान् सद्विप्रांश्च द्विजोत्तमः ४
One should offer oblations before the sun has risen, according to one tradition; after sunrise, one who knows the proper application of mantras should recite the mantras dedicated to Āditya. The excellent twice-born should study the Veda, Vedāṅgas, Śāstras, and histories, and should teach worthy disciples and virtuous Brāhmaṇas. ४

अलब्धं प्रपयेल्लब्ध्वा क्षणमात्रं समापयेत् समर्थो हि समर्थेन नाविज्ञातः क्वचिद्वसेत् ५
Whatever has not been obtained should be sought, and whatever has been obtained should be completed without delay. A capable person should not remain anywhere without being properly acquainted with what is to be done. ५

सरित्सरसि वापीषु गर्तप्रस्रवणादिषु स्त्रायीत यावदुद्धृत्य पञ्च पिण्डानि वारिणा ६
He should bathe in rivers, lakes, reservoirs, wells, springs, and similar places, having first offered five handfuls of water. ६

तीर्थाभावेऽप्यशक्त्यां वा स्त्रायात्तोयैः समाहृतैः गृहाङ्गणगतस्तत्र यावदम्बरपीडनम् ७
If a sacred bathing place is unavailable, or if he is unable to go there, he should bathe with water brought from elsewhere, even within the courtyard of his house, to the extent that his clothes can be wrung out there. ७

स्नानमब्दैवतैः कुर्यात् पावनैश्चापि मार्जनम् मन्त्रैः प्राणांस्त्रिरायम्य सौरैश्चार्कं विलोकयेत् ८
He should perform the bath with the prescribed water-deities and perform purification by sprinkling himself with sacred water. Having restrained his breath three times with mantras, he should gaze upon the Sun with the solar mantras. ८

तिष्ठन् स्थित्वा तु गायत्रीं ततः स्वाध्यायमारभेत् ऋचाञ्च यजुषां साम्नामथर्वाङ्गिरसामपि ९
Standing, he should recite the Gāyatrī; thereafter he should begin self-study of the Ṛks, Yajus, Sāmans, and Atharvāṅgiras mantras. ९

इतिहासपुराणानां वेदोपनिषदां द्विजः शक्त्या सम्यक् पठेन्नित्यमल्पमप्यासमापनात् १०
The twice-born should properly study the Itihāsas, Purāṇas, Vedas, and Upaniṣads every day according to his ability, even if only a small portion, continuing until the completion of the study. १०



--- Page 10 ---

स यज्ञदानतपसामखिलं फलमाप्नुयात् वेदेभ्योऽन्यत्र संतुष्टः स विप्रः शूद्रतामियात् तस्मादहरहर्वेदं द्विजोऽधीयीत वाग्यतः ११
He obtains the entire fruit of sacrifices, charity, and austerities. If a Brahmin finds satisfaction in anything other than the Vedas, he becomes a Śūdra; therefore, a twice-born should study the Veda every day with disciplined speech. ११

धर्मशास्त्रेतिहासादि सर्वेषां शक्तितः पठेत् कृतत्वाध्यायः प्रथमं तर्पयेच्चाथ देवताः १२
He should study the Dharmaśāstras, histories, and other scriptures according to his ability. Having completed the study, he should first offer libations to the deities. १२

जान्वा च दक्षिणं दर्भेः प्रागग्रैः सयवैस्तिलैः पुरः क्षिप्तैःकराग्राभ्यां निर्गतैः प्राङ्गरखो द्विजः एकैकाञ्जलिदानेन प्रकृतिस्थोपवीतकः १३
With the right knee upon the ground, the twice-born should face east, wearing the sacred thread in its natural position, and offer one handful of water at a time with darbha grass whose tips point east, together with barley and sesame, casting them forward from the fingertips. १३

समजानुद्वयो ब्रह्मसूत्रहार उदङ्गखः तिर्य्यग्दर्भेश्च वामाग्रैर्यवैस्तिलविमिश्रितैः १४
With both knees even, wearing the sacred thread, and facing north, he should offer water with darbha grass laid across, its tips pointing to the left, mixed with barley and sesame. १४

अम्भोभिरूत्तरक्षिप्तह कनिष्ठामूलनिर्गतैः द्वाभ्यां द्वाभ्यामञ्जलिभ्यां मनुष्यांस्तर्पयेत्ततः १५
He should then satisfy the human ancestors with water, offered in pairs of handfuls, the water being released toward the north from the base of the little finger. १५

दक्षिणाभिमुखः सव्यं जान्वा च द्विगुणैः कुशैः तिलैर्जलिअश्च देशिन्या मूलदर्भाद्विनिःसृतैः १६
Facing south, with the left knee on the ground, he should use twice-folded kuśa grass together with sesame and water, releasing it from the root of the darbha through the base of the index finger. १६

दक्षिणांसोपवीतः स्यात् क्रमेणाञ्जलिभिस्त्रिभिः सन्तर्पयेद्दिव्यपितॄस्तत्परांश्च पितॄन् स्वकान् १७
Wearing the sacred thread over the right shoulder, he should successively satisfy the divine ancestors and then his own ancestors with three handfuls of water. १७

स्वधा वर्जन्यमानेवमेक इच्छन्ति तर्पणे द्विजतिजीवत्पितृकोऽत्येतानन्याँश्च तर्पयेत् तर्पयेद्दिव्यपितॄश्च पितृपूर्वान्पितृन्स्वकान् मातृमातामहांस्तद्वत्त्रीनेवं हि त्रिभिस्त्रिभिः मातामहाश्च येऽप्यन्ये गोत्रिणो दाहवर्जिताः १८
Some hold that the word “svadhā” should be omitted in this manner during the offering of libations. A twice-born whose father is living should offer libations to these and to others as prescribed. He should also satisfy the divine ancestors, the ancestors preceding his father, his own paternal ancestors, his mother and maternal grandfather, and likewise the three ancestors in each group, each with three handfuls. He should also offer to the maternal ancestors and to other members of the lineage who were not cremated. १८

तानेकाञ्जलिदानेन तर्पयेच्च पृथक् पृथक् असंस्कृतप्रमीता ये प्रेतसंस्कारवर्जिताः १९
He should satisfy each of them separately with a single handful of water—those who died without receiving the prescribed rites and those who were deprived of funeral rites. १९

वस्त्रनिष्पीडनाम्भोभिस्तेषामाप्यायनम्भवेत् अतर्पितेषु पितृषु वस्त्रं निष्पीडयेच्च यः २०
They are refreshed by the water squeezed from the garment. If a person wrings out his garment without having offered libations to the ancestors, २०

निराशाः पितरस्तस्य भवन्ति सुरमानुषैः पयोदर्भस्वधाकारगोत्रनामतिलैर्भवेत् २१
his ancestors become disappointed and deprived of their expected offering. The ancestors are satisfied through water, darbha grass, the invocation “svadhā,” and offerings accompanied by their lineage names and sesame. २१



--- Page 11 ---

सुदत्तं तत्पुनस्तेषामेकेनापि वृथा विना अन्यचित्तेन यद्दत्तम् यद्दत्तं विधिवर्जितम् २२
What is properly offered to them should be offered again; whatever is given with a distracted mind, or whatever is given without following the prescribed procedure, is fruitless. २२

अनासनस्थितेनापि तज्जलं रुधिरायते एवं सन्तर्पिताः कामैस्तर्पकांस्तर्पयन्ति च २३
Even that water, when offered by one who is not properly seated, becomes like blood. When thus duly satisfied, the ancestors in turn fulfill the desires of those who offer them libations. २३

ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवादित्यमित्रावरुणनामभिः पूजयेल्लक्षितैर्मन्त्रैर्जलमन्त्रोक्तदेवताः २४
He should worship the deities invoked in the water-mantras with the appropriate mantras and with the names of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Āditya, Mitra, and Varuṇa. २४

उपस्थाय रवेः काष्ठां पूजयित्वा च देवताः ब्रह्माग्नीन्द्रौषधीजीवविष्णुनामहतांहसाम् २५
Having approached the quarter of the Sun and worshipped the deities—Brahmā, Agni, Indra, the herbs, living beings, and Viṣṇu—he should worship them by their names as prescribed, removing great sins. २५

अपां यत्तेति सत्कायं नमस्कारैः स्वनामभिः कृत्वा मुखं समालभ्य स्त्रानमेवं समाचरेत् ततः प्रविश्य भवनमावसथ्ये हुताशने २६
Having performed the prescribed purification with the mantra beginning “Apāṃ yat te,” and having bowed to the deities by their respective names, he should touch his face and perform the bath in this manner. Then, entering the house, he should approach the household fire. २६

पाकयज्ञाश्च चतुरो विदध्याद्विधिवद् द्विजः २७
The twice-born should duly perform the four kinds of Pākayajñas according to the prescribed procedure. २७

अनाहितावसथ्याग्निरादायान्नं घृतप्लुतम् शाकलेन विधानेन जुहुयाल्लौकिकेऽनले २८
If the household fire has not been established, he should take food mixed with ghee and offer it into the ordinary household fire according to the Śākala procedure. २८

व्यस्ताभिर्व्याहृतीभिश्च समस्ताभिस्ततः परम् षड्भिर्देवकृतस्येति मन्त्रवद्भिर्यथाक्रमम् २९
He should then make offerings with the separate Vyāhṛtis and thereafter with all the Vyāhṛtis together, followed in order by the six mantras beginning with “Devakṛtasya.” २९

प्राजापत्यं स्विष्टकृतं हुत्वैवं द्वादशाहुतीः ओङ्कारपूर्वः स्वाहान्तस्त्यागः स्विष्टविधानतः ३०
Having offered the Prājāpatya and Sviṣṭakṛt oblations, he should thus make twelve offerings. The offering should begin with Oṃ and end with Svāhā, with the final relinquishment performed according to the Sviṣṭakṛt procedure. ३०

भुविदर्भान् समास्तीर्य्य बलिकर्म समाचरेत् विश्वेभ्योदेवेभ्य इति सर्वेभ्यो भूतेभ्य एव च ३१
Having spread darbha grass upon the ground, he should perform the Bali offering, saying, “To all the gods,” and likewise offering it to all beings. ३१

भूतानां पतये चेति नमस्कारेण शास्त्रवित् दद्याद्वलित्रयञ्चाग्रे पितृभ्यश्च स्वधा नमः ३२
The knower of the scriptures should offer three Bali portions in front, with the salutation “To the Lord of beings,” and should offer to the ancestors with the words “Svadhā, obeisance.” ३२

पात्रनिर्योजनं वारि वायव्यां दिशि निःक्षिपेत् उद्धत्य षोडशग्रासमात्रमन्नं घृतोक्षितम् इदमन्नं मनुष्येभ्यो हन्तेत्युक्त्वा समुत्सृजेत् गोत्रनामस्वधाकारैः पितृभ्यश्चापि शक्तितः ३३
He should cast away the water used for washing the vessels in the north-western direction. Taking food equal to sixteen mouthfuls and sprinkling it with ghee, he should offer it, saying, “This food is for human beings.” According to his ability, he should also offer food to the ancestors with their lineage names and with the invocation “Svadhā.” ३३


--- Page 12 ---

षड्भ्योऽन्नमन्वहं दद्यात् पितृयज्ञविधानतः वेदादीनां पठेत् किञ्चिदल्पं ब्रह्ममखाप्तये ३४
According to the procedure of the Pitṛyajña, he should offer food every day to the six [groups of ancestors]. He should also study a little of the Vedas and other sacred texts for the attainment of Brahman-sacrifice. ३४

ततोऽन्यदन्नमादाय निर्गत्य भवनाद्वहिः काकेभ्यः श्वपचेभ्यश्च प्रक्षिपेद्द्यासमेव च ३५
Then, taking another portion of food, he should go outside the house and place it for crows, Caṇḍālas, and other beings, according to the prescribed practice. ३५

उपविश्य गृहद्वारि तिष्ठेद्यावन्मुहूर्तकम् अप्रमुक्तोऽतिथिं लिप्सुर्भावशुद्धः प्रतीक्षकः ३६
He should sit at the doorway of the house and wait for a muhūrta, remaining inwardly pure and free from distraction, desiring to receive a guest. ३६

आगतं दूरतः शान्तं भोक्तुकाममकिञ्चनम् दृष्ट्वा संमुखमभ्येत्य सत्कृत्य प्रश्रयाच्चनैः ३७
Seeing a peaceful, needy person who has come from afar and desires food, he should go forward to meet him, honor him, and receive him with humility and respectful words. ३७

पादधावनसम्मानाभ्यञ्जनादिभिरर्चितः त्रिदिवं प्रापयेत्सद्यो यज्ञस्याभ्यधिकोऽतिथिः ३८
Having been honored with washing of the feet, respectful reception, anointing, and other services, the guest attains heaven immediately; the guest is regarded as superior even to a sacrifice. ३८

कालागतोऽतिथिर्द्दष्टवेदपारो गृहागतः द्वावेतौ पूजितौ स्वर्गं नयतोऽधस्त्वपूजितौ विवाह्यस्त्रातकक्ष्माभृदाचार्यसुहृदृत्विजः ३९
A guest who arrives at the proper time and a learned Vedic scholar who comes to the house—these two, when honored, lead one to heaven; when dishonored, they lead downward. A bridegroom, a graduate from Vedic study, a king, an ācārya, a friend, and a ṛtvij are also regarded as [honorable guests]. ३९

अर्ध्या भवन्ति धर्मेण प्रतिवर्षं गृहागताः गृहागताय सत्कृत्य श्रोत्रियाय यथाविधि ४०
Those who come to the house once a year are, according to dharma, worthy of respectful reception. A Śrotriya who comes to the house should be properly honored. ४०

भक्त्योपकल्पयेदेकं महाभागं विसर्जयेत् विसर्जयेदनुव्रज्य सुतृप्तश्रोत्रियातिथीन् मित्रमातुलसम्बन्धिवान्धवान् समुपागतान् ४१
He should lovingly prepare food for a highly honored guest and respectfully bid him farewell. After accompanying him for a short distance, he should also send off well-satisfied Śrotriya guests, friends, maternal uncles, relatives, and other kinsmen who have come to the house. ४१

भोजयेद् गृहिणो भिक्षां सत्कृतां भिक्षुकोऽर्हति स्वाद्वन्नमश्नन्नस्वादु ददद्गच्छत्यधोगतिम् ४२
A householder should offer alms to a mendicant with due respect. One who eats delicious food himself but gives tasteless food to another goes to a lower state. ४२

गर्भिण्यातुरभृत्येषु बालवृद्धातुरादिषु बुभुक्षितेषु भुञ्जानो गृहस्थोऽश्नाति किल्विषम् ४३
A householder who eats while pregnant women, the sick, servants, children, the elderly, the infirm, or other hungry persons remain unfed consumes sin. ४३

नाद्याद्गध्येन्न पाकान्नं कदाचिदनिमन्त्रितः निमन्त्रितोऽपि निन्द्येन प्रत्याख्यानं द्विजोऽर्हति ४४
One should never eat food that has been prepared for another purpose or food from a cooking place without being invited. Even when invited, a twice-born may decline food if the host or the food is blameworthy. ४४

क्षुद्राभिशस्तवार्धष्यवाग्दुष्टक्रूरतस्कराः क्रुद्धापबिद्धबद्धोग्रवधबन्धनजीविनः ४५
[One should avoid food associated with] the base, the falsely accused, the excessively aged, the verbally corrupt, the cruel, and thieves; those who are wrathful, cast out, imprisoned, violent, killers, or those who make their livelihood through killing and confinement. ४५



--- Page 13 ---

शैलूषशौण्डिकोन्नद्धोन्मत्तव्रात्यव्रतच्युताः नग्ननास्तिकनिर्लज्जं पिशुनव्यसनान्विताः ४६
Those who are actors, sellers of intoxicating drink, arrogant, insane, outcast, fallen from their vows, naked, atheistic, shameless, slanderous, or addicted to harmful pursuits [are to be avoided]. ४६

कदर्य्यस्त्रीजितानार्य्यपरवादकृता नराः अनीशाः कीर्तिमन्तोऽपि राजदेवस्वहारकाः ४७
Miserly men, those controlled by women, ignoble persons, those who engage in slander, those without self-control, and even famous persons who steal the property of kings or deities [are to be avoided]. ४७

शयनासनसंसर्गवृत्तकर्मादिदूषिताः अश्रद्दधानाः पतिता भ्रष्टाचारादयश्च ये ४८
Those whose conduct is corrupted through improper sleeping or sitting associations, livelihood, actions, and other such practices; those without faith; fallen persons; and those of corrupt conduct [are to be avoided]. ४८

अभोज्यान्नाः स्युरन्नादो यस्य यः स्यात्स तत्समः नापितान्वयमित्रार्ध सिरिणो दासगोपकाः ४९
The food of those whose food is prohibited should likewise be considered prohibited. Barbers, persons of such lineage, friends, half-share partners, servants, and cowherds [are included among those whose food is to be considered according to the prescribed distinctions]. ४९

शूद्राणामप्यमीषान्तु भुक्त्वाऽन्नं नैव दुष्यति धर्मेणान्योन्यभोज्यान्ना द्विजास्तु विदितान्वयाः ५०
Even among Śūdras, eating the food of these persons does not itself cause impurity. According to dharma, twice-born persons of known lineage may eat one another’s food [where such commensality is permitted]. ५०

स्वृवृत्त्योपार्जितं मेध्यमकेशकृमिमक्षिकम् अश्वलीढप्रगोध्रातमस्पृष्टं शूद्रवायसैः ५१
Food properly earned through one’s own livelihood, which is pure and free from hair, worms, and flies, which has not been licked by a horse or smelled by a cow, and which has not been touched by a Śūdra or a crow [is fit to eat]. ५१

अनुच्छिष्टमसंदुष्टमपर्युषितमेव च अम्लानवाष्पमन्नाद्यमद्यान्नित्यं सुसंस्कृतम् ५२
Food that has not been touched by leftovers, is uncontaminated, not stale, fresh and free from unpleasant vapors, and properly prepared should always be eaten. ५२

कृसरापूपसंयावपायसं शष्कुलीति च नाश्नीयाद् ब्राह्मणो मांसमनियुक्तः कथञ्चन ५३
A Brahmin should not eat kṛsara, apūpa, saṃyāva, pāyasa, or śaṣkulī, nor should he eat meat under any circumstances unless he has been duly appointed or permitted [for a prescribed rite]. ५३

क्रतौ श्राद्धे नियुक्तो वा अनश्नन् पतति द्विजः मृगयोपार्जितं मांसमभ्यर्च्य पितृदेवताः ५४
A twice-born who has been appointed for a sacrifice or Śrāddha and nevertheless refuses to eat falls from his religious status. Meat obtained through hunting should be offered in worship to the ancestors and deities [when prescribed]. ५४

क्षत्त्रियो द्वादशोनं तत् क्रीत्वा वैश्योऽपि धर्मतः द्विजोजग्ध्वा वृथामांसं हत्वाप्यविधिना पशून् ५५
A Kṣatriya may obtain it by purchase according to the prescribed rule, paying twelve [units or measures less than the specified amount], and a Vaiśya likewise according to dharma. A twice-born who eats meat without purpose, or kills animals contrary to the prescribed procedure, [incurs fault]. ५५

निरयेष्वक्षयं वासमाप्नोत्याचन्द्रतारकम् सर्वान् कामान् समासाद्य फलमश्वमखस्य च ५६
He obtains an unending residence in the hells for as long as the moon and stars endure. Having obtained all desired objects [through proper observance], he attains the fruit of the Aśvamedha sacrifice. ५६

मुनिसाम्यमवाप्नोति गृहस्थोऽपि द्विजोत्तमः द्विजभोज्यानि गव्यानि माहिषाणि पयांसि च ५७
Even a householder who is an excellent twice-born attains equality with the sages. The milks of cows and buffaloes are fit to be consumed by twice-born persons. ५७

निर्दशासन्धिसम्बन्धिवत्सवन्तीपयांसि च अलावुशियुकवकच्छत्राकलशुनानि च पलाण्डुश्वेतवृन्ताकरक्तमूलकमेव च ५८
Milk that has passed beyond the prescribed ten-day period, milk associated with the junction period, and milk from a cow that has a suckling calf [are distinguished accordingly]. Bottle gourd, certain gourds and mushrooms, umbrella-shaped mushrooms, garlic, onion, white-stemmed vegetables, and red radish [are also listed among the foods subject to restriction]. ५८


--- Page 14 ---

गृञ्जनारुणवृक्षासृग्जन्तुगर्भ फलानि च अकालकुसुमादीनि द्विजोजग्ध्वैन्दवं चरेत् ५९
A twice-born who eats fruits containing substances such as gṛñjana, red tree-sap, blood-like tree exudates, or animal matter, as well as flowers that bloom out of season and similar prohibited foods, should perform the Āindava expiation. ५९

वाग्दूषितमविज्ञातमन्यपीडितकार्य्यपि भूतेभ्योऽन्नमदत्त्वा च तदन्नं गृहिणो दहेत् ६०
Food that has been verbally contaminated, whose source is unknown, that has been obtained by causing harm to another, or food offered without first giving a portion to living beings, should be rejected by the householder as though burned. ६०

हैमराजतकांस्येषु पात्रेष्वद्यात् सदा गृही तदभावे साधुगन्धलोध्रद्रुमलतासु च ६१
A householder should always eat from vessels of gold, silver, or bronze. In their absence, he may eat using vessels or leaves made from fragrant and pure trees or creepers such as lodhra. ६१

पलाशपद्मपत्रेषु गृहस्थो भोक्तुमर्हति ब्रह्मचारी यतिश्चैव श्रेयोयद्भोक्तुमर्हति ६२
A householder may eat from palāśa or lotus leaves. A brahmacārin and an ascetic should likewise eat from whatever kind of vessel or leaf is prescribed as proper for them. ६२

अभ्युक्ष्यान्नं नमस्कारैर्भुवि दद्याद्वलित्रयम् भूपतये भुवः पतये भूतानां पतये तथा ६३
After sprinkling the food with water and offering salutations, he should place three Bali offerings upon the ground—to the lord of the earth, to the lord of the earth itself, and to the lord of all beings. ६३

अपः प्राश्य ततः पश्चात् पञ्चप्राणाहुतिःक्रमात् स्वाहाकारेण जुहुयाच्छेषमद्याद्यथासुखम् ६४
After sipping water, he should then make the five offerings to the five vital breaths in succession, with the utterance “Svāhā,” and afterward eat the remaining food comfortably. ६४

अनन्यचित्तो भुञ्जीत वाग्यतोऽन्नमकुत्सयन् आतृप्तेरन्न मश्नीयादक्षुण्णां पात्रमुत्सृजेत् ६५
He should eat with undivided attention, maintaining control of speech and without criticizing the food. He should eat until satisfied and then leave the vessel undamaged and clean. ६५

उच्छिष्टमन्नमुद्धृत्य ग्रासमेकं भुवि क्षिपेत् आचान्तः साधुसङ्गेन सद्विद्यापठनेन च ६६
After removing the leftover food, he should place one mouthful upon the ground. Having performed the ācamana purification, he should spend his time in the company of virtuous people and in studying good knowledge. ६६

वृत्तवृद्धकथाभिश्चशेषाहमतिवाहयेत् सायं सन्ध्यामुपासीत हुत्वाऽग्निं भृत्यसंयुतः ६७
He should spend the remaining part of the day in discussions concerning proper conduct and accounts of the elders. In the evening, together with his dependents, he should perform the evening Sandhyā and make offerings into the fire. ६७

आपोशानक्रियापूर्वमश्नीयादन्वहं द्विजः सायमप्यतिथिः पूज्यो होमकालागतोऽनिशम् ६८
Every day the twice-born should eat after performing the Āpośāna rite. An evening guest who arrives at the time of the homa should also be honored without fail. ६८

श्रद्धया शक्तितो नित्यं श्रुतं हन्यादपूजितः नातितृप्त उपस्पृश्य प्रक्षाल्य चरणौ शुचिः ६९
One should always honor and preserve what has been heard and learned with faith and according to one's ability; if neglected, it is destroyed. Without overeating, one should perform purification, wash the feet, and become clean. ६९

अप्रत्यगुत्तरशिराः शयीत शयने शुभे शक्तिमानुचिते काले स्त्रानं सन्ध्यां न हापयेत् ७०
He should sleep on an auspicious bed with his head toward the north or east. One who is capable should bathe at the proper time and should never neglect the Sandhyā rites. ७०

ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते चोत्थाय चिन्तयेद्धितमात्मनः शक्तिमान् मतिमान् नित्यं वृत्तमेतत् समाचरेत् ७१
Rising during the Brāhma muhūrta, he should contemplate what is beneficial for himself. A capable and wise person should follow this conduct every day. ७१

इति वेदव्यासीये धर्मशास्त्रे गृहस्थाह्निकोनाम तृतीयोऽध्यायः
Thus ends the third chapter, entitled “The Daily Duties of a Householder,” in the Vedavyāsīya Dharmaśāstra.

--- Page 15 ---


चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
अथ गृहस्थाश्रमप्रशंसापूर्वक तीर्थधर्म वर्णनम्
Now begins the description of tirth dharma for grihastha ashramis 

इति व्यासकृतं शास्त्रं धर्मसारसमुच्चयम् आश्रमे यानि पुण्यानि मोक्षधर्माश्रितानि च १
Thus, this scripture composed by Vyāsa is a collection of the essence of Dharma, containing the merits prescribed for the various āśramas and the duties conducive to liberation. १

गृहाश्रमात् परो धर्मो नास्ति नास्ति पुनः पुनः सर्वतीर्थफलं तस्य यथोक्तं यस्तु पालयेत् २
There is no Dharma superior to that of the householder’s āśrama; there is none, again and again. Whoever observes it as prescribed obtains the fruit of all sacred pilgrimages. २

गुरुभक्तो भृत्यपोषी दयावाननुसूयकः नित्यजापी च होमी च सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रियः ३
He who is devoted to his Guru, supports his servants, is compassionate and free from envy, who constantly performs japa and homa, speaks the truth, and has control over his senses. ३

स्वदारे यस्य सन्तोषः परदारनिवर्तनम् अपवादोऽपि नो यस्य तस्य तीर्थफलं गृहे ४
He who is content with his own wife, abstains from other women, and against whom there is not even a word of reproach has the merit of all sacred pilgrimages within his own home. ४

परदारान् परद्रव्यं हरते यो दिने दिने सर्व्वतीर्थाभिषेकेण पापं तस्य न नश्यति ५
He who daily takes away another man’s wife or another’s wealth does not have his sins destroyed even by bathing in all the sacred tīrthas. ५

गृहेषु सेवनीयेषु सर्वतीर्थफलं ततः अन्नदस्य त्रयो भागाः कर्ता भोगेन लिप्यते ६
When one properly serves those who are worthy of service in the household, one obtains the fruit of all sacred pilgrimages. Of the three portions belonging to the giver of food, the doer becomes bound by enjoyment. ६

प्रतिश्रयं पादशौचं ब्राह्मणानाञ्च तर्पणम् न पापं संस्पृशेत्तस्य बलिं भिक्षां ददाति यः ७
He who provides lodging, washes the feet of Brāhmaṇas, and offers them nourishment, and who gives bali and alms, is not touched by sin. ७

पादोदकं पादघृतं दीपमन्नं प्रतिश्रयम् यो ददाति ब्राह्मणेभ्यो नोपसर्पति तं यमः ८
He who gives Brāhmaṇas water for washing their feet, oil or ghee for their feet, a lamp, food, and lodging—Yama does not approach him. ८

विप्रपादोदकक्लिन्ना यावत्तिष्ठति मेदिनी तावत् पुष्करपात्रेषु पिबन्ति पितरोऽमृतम् ९
For as long as the earth remains moistened by the water from a Brāhmaṇa’s feet, for that long the ancestors drink nectar from vessels in Puṣkara. ९

यत्फलं कपिलादाने कार्तिक्यां ज्येष्ठपुष्करे तत्फलं ऋषयः श्रेष्ठा विप्राणां पादशौचने १०
The merit that is obtained by giving a tawny cow in the month of Kārtika at the sacred Jyeṣṭha-Puṣkara is obtained, say the great ṛṣis, by washing the feet of Brāhmaṇas. १०

स्वागतेनाग्नयः प्रीता आसनेन शतक्रतुः पितरः पादशौचेन अन्नाद्येन प्रजापतिः ११
The sacred fires are pleased by a respectful welcome, Śatakratu (Indra) by offering a seat, the ancestors by washing the feet, and Prajāpati by food and other offerings. ११



--- Page 16 ---

मातापित्रोः परं तीर्थं गङ्गा गावो विशेषतः ब्राह्मणात् परमं तीर्थं न भूतं न भविष्यति १२
There is no greater sacred tīrtha than one’s mother and father; the Gaṅgā and cows are especially sacred. There has never been, nor will there ever be, a greater tīrtha than a Brāhmaṇa. १२

इन्द्रियाणि वशीकृत्य गृह एव वसेन्नरः तत्र तस्य कुरुक्षेत्रं नैमिषं पुष्कराणि च १३
Having brought his senses under control, a person should remain in his own home. For him, his home itself becomes Kurukṣetra, Naimiṣa, and Puṣkara. १३

गङ्गाद्वारञ्च केदारं सन्निहत्यां तथैव च एतानि सर्वतीर्थानि कृत्वा पापैः प्रमुच्यते १४
Gaṅgādvāra, Kedāra, and Sannihati likewise are among these sacred places. By performing the practices associated with all these tīrthas, one becomes freed from sins. १४

वर्णानामाश्रमाणाञ्च चातुर्वर्णस्य भो द्विजाः दानधर्म प्रवक्ष्यामि यथा व्यासेन भाषितम् १५
O twice-born ones, I shall now explain the Dharma of charity for the four varṇas and the āśramas, as spoken by Vyāsa. १५

यद्ददाति विशिष्टेभ्यो यच्चाश्नाति दिने दिने तच्च वित्तमहं मन्ये शेषं कस्याभिरक्षति १६
Whatever a person gives to the worthy and whatever he eats day after day—that alone do I regard as his wealth. For whose sake does he preserve the remainder? १६

यद्ददाति यदश्नाति तदेव धनिनो धनम् अन्ये मृतस्य क्रीडन्ति दारैरपि धनैरपि १७
Whatever a wealthy person gives away and whatever he consumes—that alone is truly his wealth. Others will merely enjoy his wives and wealth after his death. १७

किं धनेन करिष्यन्ति देहिनोऽपि गतायुषः यद्वर्द्धयितुमिच्छन्तस्तच्छरीरमशाश्वतम् १८
What will embodied beings do with wealth once their lifespan has ended? The very body whose prosperity they seek to increase is itself impermanent. १८

अशाश्वतानि गात्राणि विभवो नैव शाश्वतः नित्यं सन्निहितो मृत्युः कर्तव्यो धर्मसंग्रहः १९
The limbs of the body are impermanent, and wealth is certainly not permanent. Death is ever near; therefore, one should accumulate Dharma. १९

यदि नाम न धर्माय न कामाय न कीर्तये यत्परित्यज्य गन्तव्यं गद्धनं किं न दीयते २०
If wealth is not used for Dharma, desire, or good reputation, and if it must ultimately be abandoned when one departs, why should that wealth not be given away? २०

जीवन्ति जीविते यस्य विप्रा मित्राणि बान्धवाः जीवितं सफलं तस्य आत्मार्थे को न जीवति २१
His life is fruitful in whose lifetime Brāhmaṇas, friends, and relatives live well because of him. Who does not live merely for his own sake? २१

क्रिमयः किं न जीवन्ति भक्षयन्ति परस्परम् परलोकाविरोधेन यो जीवति स जीवति पशवोऽपि हि जीवन्ति केवलात्मोदरम्भराः किं कायेन सुगुप्तेन बलिना चिरजीविनः २२
Do not worms also live, devouring one another? He alone truly lives who lives without obstructing his welfare in the next world. Animals too live, merely filling their own bellies; what is the use of a well-protected, strong, and long-lived body? २२

ग्रासादर्धमपि ग्रासमर्थिभ्यः किं न दीयते इच्छानुरूपो विभवः कदा करय भविष्यति २३
Why not give even half of a morsel, or a morsel itself, to those who are in need? When will wealth become available in accordance with one’s every desire? २३


--- Page 17 ---

अदाता पुरुषस्त्यागी धनं संत्यज्य गच्छति दातारं कृपणं मन्ये मृतोऽप्यर्थं न मुञ्चति २४
The non-giver is ultimately a renouncer, for he departs leaving his wealth behind. I regard the giver as truly generous; even after death, the miser does not relinquish his wealth. २४

प्राणानाशस्तु कर्तव्यो यः कृतार्थो न सोऽमृतः अकृतार्थस्तु यो मृत्युं प्राप्तः खरसमोहि सः २५
One should strive to make life fruitful. He who has fulfilled his purpose is not truly dead, whereas one who reaches death without accomplishing his purpose is like an ass. २५

अनाहूतेषु यद्दत्तं यच्च दत्तमयाचितम् भविष्यति युगस्यान्तस्तस्यान्तो न भविष्यति २६
Whatever is given to those who have not been invited, and whatever is given without being asked for, will endure until the end of the age; its end will never come. २६

मृतवत्सा यथा गौश्च तृष्णा लोभेन दुह्यति परस्परस्य दानानि लोकयात्रा न धर्मतः २७
Just as a cow whose calf is dead cannot be milked, greed and craving do not produce true giving. The exchange of gifts merely for worldly dealings is not Dharma. २७

अदृष्टे चाशुभे दानं भोक्ता चैव न दृश्यते पुनरागमनं नास्ति तत्र दानमनन्तकम् २८
When a gift is made without seeking any visible or auspicious return, and when there is no expectation of seeing the recipient enjoy it, there is no return to be sought; such charity is endless in its merit. २८

मातापितृषु यद्दद्याद् भ्रातृषु श्वशुरेषु च जायापत्येषु यद्दद्यात् सोऽनन्तः स्वर्गसंक्रमः २९
Whatever one gives to one’s mother and father, brothers, parents-in-law, wife, and children becomes an endless passage to heaven. २९

पितुः शतगुणं दानं सहस्रं मातुरुच्यते भगिन्यां शतसाहस्रं सोदरे दत्तमक्षयम् ३०
A gift to one’s father is said to yield a hundredfold merit, to one’s mother a thousandfold, to one’s sister a hundred thousandfold, while a gift to one’s own brother is imperishable. ३०

इन्दुक्षयः पिता ज्ञेयो माता चैव दिनक्षयः संक्रान्तिर्भगिनी चैव व्यतीपातः सहोदरः अहन्यहनि दातव्यं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो मुनीश्वर आगमिष्यति यत् पात्रं तत्पात्रं तारयिष्यति ३१
The father should be understood as the waning moon, the mother as the waning day, the sister as Saṅkrānti, and the brother as Vyatīpāta. O great sage, one should give to Brāhmaṇas every day. Whatever worthy recipient comes, that recipient will carry one across to the other shore. ३१

किञ्चिद्वेदमयं पात्रं किञ्चित् पात्रं तपोमयम् पात्राणामुत्तमं पात्रं शूद्रान्नं यस्य नोदरे ३२
Some recipients are embodiments of the Veda, while some are embodiments of austerity. The best of recipients is one in whose stomach there is no food obtained from a Śūdra. ३२

यस्य चैव गृहे मूर्खी दूरे चापि गुणान्वितः गुणन्विताय दातव्यं नास्ति मूर्खे व्यतिक्रमः ३३
If there is a foolish person in one’s own household while a virtuous person is far away, one should give to the virtuous person; there should be no departure from this principle in favor of the foolish. ३३

देवद्रव्यविनाशेन ब्रह्मस्वहरणेन च कुलान्यकुलतां यान्ति ब्राह्मणातिक्रमेण च ३४
By destroying property belonging to the gods, by taking away the property of Brāhmaṇas, and by transgressing against Brāhmaṇas, families lose their noble lineage and become degraded. ३४

ब्राह्मणातिक्रमो नास्ति विप्रे वेदविवर्जिते ज्वलन्तमग्निसुत्सृज्य न हि भस्मनि हूयते ३५
There is no transgression in disregarding a Brāhmaṇa who is devoid of the Veda; just as, abandoning a blazing fire, one does not offer an oblation into ashes. ३५


--- Page 18 ---

सन्निकृष्टमधीयानं ब्राह्मणं यो व्यतिक्रमेत् भोजने चैव दाने च हन्यात्त्रिपुरुषं कुलम् ३६
He who disregards a Brāhmaṇa who is nearby and engaged in Vedic study, whether in matters of food or charity, destroys the merit and welfare of three generations of his family. ३६

यथा काष्ठमयो हस्ती यथा चर्ममयो मृगः यश्च विप्रोऽनधीयानस्त्रयस्ते नामधारकाः ३७
Just as an elephant made of wood and a deer made of leather are merely elephants and deer in name, so too is a Brāhmaṇa who does not study the Veda merely a Brāhmaṇa in name. ३७

ग्रामस्थानं यथा शून्यं यथा कूपश्च निर्जलः यश्च विप्रोऽनधीयानस्त्रयस्ते नामधारकाः ३८
Just as a place in a village without inhabitants is empty and a well without water is useless, so too is a Brāhmaṇa who does not study the Veda merely a Brāhmaṇa in name. ३८

ब्राह्मणेषु च यद्दत्तं यच्च वैश्वानरे हुतम् तद्धनं धनमाख्यातं धनं शेषं निरर्थकम् ३९
Whatever is given to Brāhmaṇas and whatever is offered into Vaiśvānara, the sacred fire, is declared to be true wealth; all remaining wealth is meaningless. ३९

स्ममब्राह्मणे दानं द्विगुणं ब्राह्मणब्रुवे सहस्त्रगुणमाचार्ये ह्यनन्तं वेदपारगे ४०
A gift to one who is merely called a Brāhmaṇa yields twice the merit; to one who truly lives as a Brāhmaṇa, a thousandfold; to an Ācārya, it is manifold; and to one who has mastered the Veda, it is infinite. ४०

ब्रह्मबीजसमुत्पन्नो मन्त्रसंस्कारवर्जितः जातिमात्रोपजीवी च स भवेद् ब्राह्मणः नमः ४१
One born from the seed of Brahman but devoid of the purifying rites of mantras and living merely by his birth becomes only a Brāhmaṇa by name. ४१

गर्भाधानादिभिर्मन्त्रैर्वेदोपनयनेन च नाध्यापयति नाधीते स भवेद् ब्राह्मणब्रुवः ४२
One who, despite the mantras beginning with Garbhādhāna and the initiation into Vedic study, neither teaches nor studies the Veda becomes merely a Brāhmaṇa by name. ४२

अग्निहोत्री तपस्वी च वेदमध्यापयेच्च यः सकल्पं सरहस्यञ्च तमाचार्यं प्रचक्षते ४३
He who performs Agnihotra, practices austerity, and teaches the Veda together with its Saṅkalpa and esoteric teachings is called an Ācārya. ४३

इष्टिभिः पशुबन्धैश्च चातुर्मास्यैस्तथैव च अग्निष्टोमादिभिर्यज्ञैर्येन चेष्टं स इष्टवान् ४४
He by whom the desired rites have been performed through Iṣṭis, animal sacrifices, Cāturmāsya rites, and sacrifices such as Agniṣṭoma is called an Iṣṭavān, one who has performed sacrificial rites. ४४

मीमांस्ते च यो वेदान् षद्भिरङ्गैः सविस्तरैः इतिहासपुराणानि स भवेद्वेदपारगः ४५
He who investigates the Vedas together with their six auxiliary disciplines in detail, as well as the Itihāsas and Purāṇas, becomes one who has mastered the Veda. ४५

ब्राह्मणा येन जीवन्ति नान्यो वर्णः कथञ्चन इदृक्पथमुपस्थाय कोऽन्यस्तं त्यक्तुमुत्सहेत् ४६
By means of him the Brāhmaṇas live, and no other varṇa does so in the same manner. Having adopted such a way of life, who else would dare to abandon it? ४६

ब्राह्मणः स भवेच्चैव देवानामपि दैवतम् प्रत्यक्षञ्चैव लोकस्य ब्रह्मतेजो हि कारणम् ४७
Such a Brāhmaṇa indeed becomes a deity even among the gods; he is also manifestly revered in the world, for the radiance of Brahman is the cause of this. ४७

ब्राह्मणस्य मुखं क्षेत्रं निष्ककरमकण्टकम् वापयेत्तत्र बीजानि स कृषिः सार्वकामिकी ४८
The mouth of a Brāhmaṇa is like a field, free from stones and thorns. Whoever sows seeds there obtains a harvest capable of fulfilling every desire. ४८


--- Page 19 ---

सुक्षेत्रो वापयेद्वीजं सुपात्रे दापयेद्धनम् सुक्षेत्रे च सुपात्रे च क्षिप्तं नैव विदुष्यति ४९
One should sow seed in a good field and give wealth to a worthy recipient. What is placed in a good field and given to a worthy recipient never goes to waste. ४९

विद्याविनयसम्पन्ने ब्राह्मने गृहमागते क्रीडन्त्योषधयः सर्वा यास्यामः परमां गतिम् ५०
When a Brāhmaṇa endowed with knowledge and humility comes to the house, all the medicinal plants rejoice, saying, “We shall attain the highest state.” ५०

नष्टशौचे व्रतभ्रष्टे विप्रे वेदविवर्जिते दीयमानं रुदत्स्यन्नं भयार्द्व दुष्कृतं कृतम् ५१
When food is given to a Brāhmaṇa who has lost purity, fallen from his vows, and is devoid of Vedic learning, and he eats it weeping out of fear, the giver incurs sin. ५१

वेदपूर्णमुखं विप्रं सुभुक्तमपि भोजयेत् नच मूर्ख निराहारं षड्रात्रमुपवासिनम् ५२
One should feed a Brāhmaṇa whose mouth is filled with the Veda, even if he has already eaten well; but one should not feed a fool merely because he has fasted for six nights. ५२

यानि यस्य पवित्राणि कुक्षौ तिष्ठन्ति भो द्विजाः तानि तस्य प्रयोज्यानि न शरीराणि देहिनाम् ५३
O twice-born ones, whatever sacred things reside within a person’s body should be offered for his spiritual purpose; the bodies of embodied beings themselves are not the proper objects of such offerings. ५३

यस्य देहे सदाऽश्नन्ति हव्यानि त्रिदिवौकसः कव्यानि चैव पितरः किम्भूतमधिकं ततः ५४
In whose body the inhabitants of heaven continually partake of offerings to the gods, and the ancestors partake of offerings to the departed, what greater distinction could there be than this? ५४

यद्भुङ्गे वेदविद्विप्रः स्वकर्मनिरतः शुचिः दातुः फलमसङ्ख्यातं प्रतिजन्म तदक्षयम् ५५
Whatever a pure Brāhmaṇa learned in the Veda and devoted to his prescribed duties consumes, the giver obtains immeasurable merit from it, which remains inexhaustible in every birth. ५५

हस्त्यश्वरथयानानि केचिदिच्छन्ति पण्डिताः अहं नेच्छामि मुनयः कस्यैताः शस्यसम्पदः ५६
Some learned men desire elephants, horses, and chariots as their means of conveyance. But I do not desire these, O sages. Whose prosperity in crops is all this? ५६

वेदलाङ्गलकृष्टेषु द्विजश्रेष्ठेषु सत्सु च यत्पुरा पातितं बीजं तस्यैताः सस्यसम्पदः ५७
These abundant crops are the result of the seeds that were formerly sown in the excellent twice-born who cultivate the field with the plough of the Veda. ५७

शतेषु जायते शूरः सहस्त्रेषु च पण्डितः ५८
A heroic person is born among a hundred, and a learned person among a thousand. ५८

वक्ता शतसहस्त्रेषु दाता भवति वा न वा न रणे विजयाच्छूरोऽध्ययनान्न च पण्डितः ५९
Among a hundred thousand, perhaps one becomes an eloquent speaker or a giver. A person does not become heroic merely by winning a battle, nor learned merely through study. ५९

न वक्ता वाक्पटत्वेन न दाता चार्थदानतः इन्द्रियाणां जये शूरो धर्मं चरति पण्डितः ६०
A person is not truly a speaker merely because he is eloquent, nor a giver merely because he gives wealth. He is heroic through conquering the senses and learned through practicing Dharma. ६०

हितप्रियोक्तिभिर्वक्ता दाता सम्मानदानतः ६१
He is a speaker through beneficial and pleasing words, and a giver through offering respect and honor. ६१

यद्येकपङ्कयां विषमं ददाति स्नेहाद्भयाद्वा यदि वार्थहेतोः वेदेषु दृष्टं ऋषिभिश्च गीतम् तद्ब्रह्महत्यां मुनयो वदन्ति ६२
If, in the same row, one gives an unequal share out of affection, fear, or for the sake of wealth, the Vedas have declared, and the ṛṣis have sung, that the sages regard this as equivalent to the killing of a Brāhmaṇa. ६२

--- Page 20 ---

ऊषरे वापितं वीजं भिन्नभाण्डेषु गोदुहम् हुतं भस्मनि हव्यञ्च मूर्खे दानमशाश्वतम् ६३
Seed sown in barren soil, milked milk placed in a broken vessel, an offering cast into ashes, and a gift given to a fool are all impermanent and fruitless. ६३

मृतसूतकपुष्टाङ्गो द्विजः शूद्रान्नभोजने अहमेवं न जानामि कां योनिं स गमिष्यति ६४
A twice-born person whose body has become nourished by eating Śūdra food during the impurity following a death—I do not know into what birth such a person will go. ६४

शूद्रान्नेनोदरस्थेन यदि कश्चिन्प्रियेत यः स भवेत् च्छूकरो नूनं तस्य वा जायते कुलम् ६५
If someone dies while Śūdra food remains in his stomach, he certainly becomes a pig, or is born into its lineage. ६५

गृध्रो द्वादश जन्मानि सप्त जन्मानि शूकरः श्वा चैव सप्त जन्मानि इत्येवं मनुरब्रवीत् अमृतं ब्राह्मणान्नेन दारिद्रं क्षत्रियस्य च ६६
Manu has said: one becomes a vulture for twelve births, a pig for seven births, and a dog for seven births. Food from a Brāhmaṇa is regarded as nectar, while food from a Kṣatriya leads to poverty. ६६

वैश्यान्नेन तु शूद्रत्वं शूद्रान्नान्नरकं ब्रजेत् यश्च भुङ्गेऽथ शूद्रान्नं मासमेकं निरन्तरम् ६७
Through eating the food of a Vaiśya one becomes a Śūdra; through eating Śūdra food one goes to hell. He who eats Śūdra food continuously for one month— ६७

इह जन्मनि शूद्रत्वं मृतः श्वा चैव जायते यस्य शूद्रा पचेन्नित्यं शूद्रो वा गृहमेधिनी ६८
—becomes a Śūdra in this birth and, after death, is born as a dog. A twice-born person for whom a Śūdra woman cooks every day, or whose householder wife is a Śūdra, is likewise condemned. ६८

वर्जितः पितृदेवैस्तु रौरवं याति स द्विजः भाण्डसङ्करसङ्कीर्णा नानासङ्करसङ्कराः ६९
That twice-born person, being rejected by the ancestors and gods, goes to Raurava. Those who are mixed through various forms of social and lineage mixture— ६९

योनिसङ्करसङ्कीर्णा निरयं यान्ति मानवाः पङ्गिभेदी वृथापाकी नित्यं ब्राह्मणनिन्दकः ७०
—those humans born amid such intermixture of lineages go to hell. One who divides a common dining group, one who cooks uselessly, and one who constantly reviles Brāhmaṇas— ७०

आदेशी वेदविक्रेता पञ्चैते ब्रह्मघातकाः ७१
—one who merely gives orders, one who sells the Veda, and these five are considered destroyers of Brahman, or Brahmin-slayers. ७१

इदं व्यासमतं नित्यमध्येतव्यं प्रयत्नतः एतदुक्ताचारवतः पतनं नव विद्यते ७२
This teaching of Vyāsa should always be studied diligently. For one who follows the conduct prescribed here, there is no downfall. ७२

इति श्रीवेदव्यासीये धर्मशास्त्रे गृहस्थाश्रमप्रशंसादिवर्णनो नाम
चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
समाप्ता चेयं व्यासस्मृतिः


