--- Page 1 ---
अथ यमस्मृतिः
श्रीगणेशायनमः 

अथ प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Now begins the description of expiation.

अथातो ह्यस्य धर्मस्य प्रायश्चित्ताभिधायकम् चतुर्णामपि वर्णानां धर्मशास्त्रं प्रवर्त्तते १
Now, therefore, the Dharmaśāstra prescribing the expiations for this Dharma is set forth for all four varṇas. १

जलाग्नयुद्वन्धनभ्रष्टाः प्रब्रज्यानशनच्युताः विषप्रपतनप्रायशस्त्रघातच्युताश्च ये २
Those who have fallen into water or fire, those who have died by hanging, those who have fallen from the religious life or from fasting, and those who have died through poison, falling, or wounds inflicted by weapons— २

सर्वे ते प्रत्यवसिताः सर्वलोकवहिष्कृताः चान्द्रायणेन शुध्यन्ति तप्तकृच्छ्रद्वयेन वा ३
All such persons who have fallen from their prescribed conduct and have been excluded from society are purified by the Cāndrāyaṇa expiation or by two Tapta-Kṛcchras. ३

उभयावसिताः पापा येऽग्राम्यशरणच्युताः इन्दुद्वयेन शुध्यन्ति दत्त्वा धेनुं तथा वृषम् ४
Those sinners who have fallen from both forms of prescribed conduct and who have been deprived of the protection of society are purified by two Cāndrāyaṇas, after giving a cow and a bull. ४

गोब्राह्मणहनं दग्धा मृतमुद्वन्धनेन च पाशं तस्यैव छित्त्वा तु तप्तकृच्छ्रं समाचरेत् ५
If a cow or a Brāhmaṇa has been killed by burning, or a person has died by hanging, the noose should first be cut away, and then the Tapta-Kṛcchra expiation should be performed. ५

कृमिभिर्ब्रणसंभूतैर्मक्षिकाश्वोपधातितः कृच्छ्रार्द्ध संप्रकुर्वीत शक्त्या दद्यात्तु दक्षिणाम् ६
One afflicted by worms arising from a wound, or harmed by flies and horses, should perform half of a Kṛcchra according to his ability and should give the prescribed sacrificial fee according to his means. ६

ब्राह्मणस्य मलद्वारे पूयशोणितसम्भवे कृमिभुक्तव्रणे मौञ्जीहोमेन स विशुध्यति ७
When pus and blood arise at a Brāhmaṇa's anal passage, or when there is a wound eaten by worms, he becomes purified through a Maunja-homa, a fire offering involving muñja grass. ७

यः क्षत्रियस्तथा वैश्यः शूद्रश्चाप्यनुलोमजः ज्ञात्वा भुङ्गे विशेषेण चरेच्चान्द्रायणं व्रतम् ८
A Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, Śūdra, or one born from an anuloma union who knowingly eats what is specifically forbidden should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa vow. ८

कुक्कुटाण्डप्रमाणन्तु ग्रासञ्च परिकल्पयेत् अन्यथाहारदोषेण न स तत्र विशुध्यति ९
Each mouthful should be measured to the size of a hen's egg; otherwise, because of the fault in the prescribed quantity of food, he is not purified by that observance. ९

एकैकं वर्द्धयेच्छुक्ले कृष्णपक्षे च ह्रासयेत् अमावास्यां न भुञ्जीत एष चान्द्रायणोविधिः १०
During the bright fortnight, he should increase the number of mouthfuls by one each day; during the dark fortnight, he should decrease them by one each day. He should eat nothing on the new-moon day. This is the prescribed Cāndrāyaṇa observance. १०

सुरान्यमद्यपानेन गोमांसभक्षणे कृते तप्तकृच्छ्रञ्चरेद्विप्रस्यत्पापस्तु प्रणश्यति ११
If a Brāhmaṇa has drunk liquor or other intoxicating beverages, or has eaten beef, he should perform the Tapta-Kṛcchra; thereby his sin is destroyed. ११


--- Page 2 ---

प्रायश्चित्ते ह्युपक्रान्ते कर्ता यदि विपद्यते पूतस्तदहरेवापि इहलोके परत्र च १२
If the person undertaking an expiation dies after beginning it, he is purified on that very day, both in this world and in the next. १२

यावदेकः पृथक् द्रव्यः प्रायश्चित्तेन शुध्यति अपरास्ते न च स्पृश्यास्तेऽपि सर्वे विगर्हिताः १३
As long as one particular person is purified through the prescribed expiation, the others are not to be touched; they too are regarded as blameworthy. १३

अभोज्याश्चाप्रतिग्राह्या असंपाठया विवाहिनः पूयन्तेऽनुव्रते चीर्णे सर्वे ते ऋक्थभागिनः १४
They are unfit to be given food, unfit to be accepted from, and unfit for study and marriage; when the prescribed vow has been completed, all of them are purified and become entitled to inheritances. १४

ऊनैकादशवर्षस्य पञ्चवर्षात् परस्य च प्रायश्चित्तं चरेद् भ्राता पिता वान्योऽपि बान्धवः १५
For a child under eleven years of age but above five years, the brother, father, or another relative should perform the prescribed expiation on his behalf. १५

अतोबालतरस्यापि नापराधो न पातकम् राजदण्डो न तस्यास्ति प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते १६
For one younger than this, there is neither an offence nor a sin; there is no royal punishment for him, and no expiation is prescribed. १६

अशीतीर्यस्य वर्षाणि बालोवाप्यूनषोडशः प्रायश्चित्तार्धमर्हन्ति स्त्रियोरोगिण एव च १७
Those who are eighty years old, children below sixteen years of age, women, and the sick are entitled to perform half of the prescribed expiation. १७

अस्तंगतो यदा सूर्यश्चाण्डालरजकस्त्रियः संस्पृष्टास्तु तदा कैश्चित् प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् १८
When the sun has set, if one has come into contact with a Caṇḍāla or a washerwoman, some authorities ask what expiation should then be performed. १८

जातरूपं सुवर्णञ्च दिवानीतं च यज्जलम् तेन स्नात्वा च पीत्वा च सर्वे ते शुचयः स्मृताः १९
By bathing in and drinking water brought during the daytime in a golden or precious-metal vessel, all such persons are regarded as purified. १९

दासनापितगोपालकुलमित्रार्द्धसीरिणः एते शूद्रेषु भोज्यान्ना यश्चात्मनं निवेदयेत् २०
Servants, barbers, cowherds, family friends, and those who cultivate half a plough-share are among the Śūdras whose food may be eaten by one who has entrusted himself to them. २०

अन्नं शूद्रस्य भोज्यं वा ये भुञ्जन्त्यबुधा नराः प्रायश्चित्तं तथा प्राप्तं चरेच्चान्द्रायणं व्रतम् २१
Those ignorant persons who eat the food of a Śūdra, or food that is otherwise forbidden, should undertake the prescribed expiation and perform the Cāndrāyaṇa vow. २१

प्राप्ते द्वादशमे वर्षे यः कन्यां न प्रयच्छति मासि मासि रजस्तस्याः पिता पिबति शोणितम् २२
When the twelfth year has been reached, if a father does not give his daughter in marriage, he is said to drink her menstrual blood month after month. २२

माता चैव पिता चैव ज्येष्ठोभ्राता तथैव च त्रयस्ते नरकं यान्ति दृष्ट्वा कन्यां रजस्बलाम् २३
The mother, the father, and the elder brother—these three are said to go to hell if they see the girl become subject to menstruation while remaining unmarried. २३

यस्तां विवाहयेत् कन्यां ब्राह्मणो मदमोहितः असंभाष्यो ह्यपाङ्गेयः स विप्रो वृषलीपतिः २४
A Brāhmaṇa who, deluded by pride or infatuation, marries such a girl is to be shunned and avoided; that Brāhmaṇa is regarded as a husband of a Vṛṣalī. २४

--- Page 3 ---

वन्ध्या तु वृषली ज्ञेया वृषली तु मृतप्रजाः शूद्री तु वृषली ज्ञेया कुमारी तु रजस्वला २५
A barren woman is known as a Vṛṣalī; a woman whose children have all died is also a Vṛṣalī. A Śūdrī woman is known as a Vṛṣalī, and a maiden who has begun to menstruate is likewise regarded as a Vṛṣalī. २५

यत् करोत्येकरात्रेण वृषलीसेवनाद् द्विजः तद्वैक्षभुग् जपन्नित्यं त्रिभिर्वर्षैर्व्यपोहति २६
Whatever sin a twice-born man incurs by associating with a Vṛṣalī for a single night, he removes over three years by living on alms and constantly reciting the prescribed prayers. २६

स्ववृषं या परित्यज्यान्यवृषेण वृहस्पतिः वृषली सा तु विज्ञेया न शूद्री वृषली भवेत् २७
According to Bṛhaspati, a woman who abandons her own husband and associates with another man is to be known as a Vṛṣalī; a Śūdrī woman does not thereby become a Vṛṣalī. २७

वृषलीफेनपीतस्य निःश्वासोपहतस्य च तस्याञ्चैव प्रसूतस्य निष्कृतिनैव विद्यते २८
For one who has drunk the foam from a Vṛṣalī's mouth, for one contaminated by her breath, or for one born from her, no expiation is prescribed. २८

श्वित्रकुष्ठी तथा चैव कुनखी श्यावदन्तकः रोगी हीनातिरिक्ताङ्गः पिशुनोमत्सरस्तथा २९
Those afflicted with white leprosy, leprosy, diseased nails, or darkened teeth; the sick; those with deficient or excessive limbs; the slanderous and the envious— २९

दुर्भगो हि तथा षण्डः पाषण्डी वेदनिन्दकः हैतुकः शूद्रयाजी च अयाज्यानाञ्च याजकः ३०
those who are unfortunate, eunuchs, heretics, revilers of the Veda, sophists who rely on mere argument, priests who perform sacrifices for Śūdras, and those who officiate for persons unfit for sacrifice— ३०

नित्यं प्रतिग्रहे लुब्धोयाचकोविषयात्मकः श्यावदन्तोऽथ वैद्यश्च असदालापकस्तथा ३१
those who are constantly greedy for receiving gifts, beggars, those devoted to sensual pleasures, those with darkened teeth, physicians, and those who engage in improper speech— ३१

एते श्राद्धे च दाने च वर्जनीयाः प्रयत्नतः ३२
All these should be carefully excluded from Śrāddha ceremonies and from the giving of gifts. ३२

ततोदेवलकश्चैव भृतकोवेदविक्रयी एते वर्ज्याः प्रयत्नेन एतद्भास्वतिरब्रवीत् ३३
Also to be carefully excluded are a Devalaka, a hired priest, and one who sells the Veda; this is what Bhāsvati has declared. ३३

एतान्नियोजयेद्यस्तु हव्ये कव्ये च कर्मणि निराशाः पितरस्तस्य यान्ति देवामहर्षिभिः ३४
Whoever appoints such persons for offerings to the gods or ancestors causes his ancestors to become disappointed and to depart along with the gods and great sages. ३४

अग्रे माहिषिकं दृष्ट्वा मध्ये तु वृषलीपतिम् अन्ते वाधुषिकं दृष्ट्वा निराशाः पितरोगताः ३५
If a Māhiṣika is seen at the beginning, a Vṛṣalīpati in the middle, or a Vādhuṣika at the end, the ancestors depart disappointed. ३५

महिषीत्युच्यते भार्या या चैव व्यभिचारिणी तान् दोषान् क्षमते यस्तु स वै माहिषिकः स्मृतः ३६
A wife who is called a Māhiṣī and who is adulterous—one who tolerates such faults in her—is known as a Māhiṣika. ३६

समार्घन्तु समुद्धत्य महार्घ यः प्रयच्छति स वै वाधुषिर्कोनाम ब्रह्मवादिषु गर्हितः ३७
One who raises an agreed price and then demands or accepts a much higher price is called a Vādhuṣika; such a person is condemned by those who uphold the teachings of Brahman. ३७

--- Page 4 ---

यावदुष्णं भवत्यन्नं यावद्धुञ्जन्ति वाग्यताः अश्नन्ति पितरस्तावद्यावन्नोक्ता हविर्गुणाः ३८
As long as the food remains warm and the disciplined participants are eating in silence, the ancestors partake of it; therefore, until the qualities of the offering have been spoken of, they continue to partake of it. ३८

हविर्गुणा न वक्तव्याः पितरो यत्र तर्पिताः पितृभिस्तर्पितैः पश्चाद्वक्तव्यं शोभनं हविः ३९
The qualities of the offering should not be spoken of while the ancestors are being satisfied. Only afterward, when the ancestors have been satisfied, should one say that the offering was excellent. ३९

यावतो ग्रसते ग्रासान् हव्यकव्येषु मन्त्रवित् तावतोग्रसते पिण्डान् शरीरे ब्रह्मणः पिता ४०
As many mouthfuls as the knower of the mantras consumes during the offerings to gods and ancestors, so many rice-balls does the father of the Brāhmaṇa consume in his subtle body. ४०

उच्छिष्टोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः शुना शूद्रेण वा द्विजः उपोष्य रजमीमेकां पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ४१
A twice-born person who is touched by the remnants of food, or by a dog or a Śūdra after they have eaten, becomes purified by fasting for one day and taking Pañcagavya. ४१

अनुच्छिष्टेन संस्पृष्टे स्त्रानमात्रं विधीयते तेनैवोच्छिष्टसंस्पृष्टः प्राजापत्यं समाचरेत् ४२
If he is touched by one who has not eaten, only bathing is prescribed. If he is touched by one who has eaten and has food remnants, he should perform a Prājāpatya expiation. ४२

यावद्विप्रा न पूज्यन्ते सम्भोजनहिरण्यकैः तावच्चीर्णव्रतस्यापि तत्पापं न प्रणश्यति ४३
Until the Brāhmaṇas have been honored with a meal and gifts of gold, the sin does not disappear, even for one who has completed the prescribed vow. ४३

यद्वेष्टितं काकबलाकचिल्लैरमेध्यलिप्तं तु भवेच्छरीरम् गात्रे मुखे च प्रविशेच्च सम्यक् स्त्रानेन लेपोपहतस्य शुद्धिः ४४
If the body becomes smeared with impure substances carried or deposited by crows, herons, or kites, and such impurity enters the limbs or mouth, purification is achieved by bathing properly. ४४

ऊर्ध्वं नाभेः करौ मुक्त्वा यदङ्गमुपहन्यते ऊर्ध्वं स्त्रानमधःशौचं तन्मात्रेणैव शुध्यति ४५
If any part of the body above the navel, excluding the hands, is polluted, bathing is prescribed; for pollution below that, cleansing of the affected part alone is sufficient. ४५

अभक्ष्याणामपेयानामलेह्यानाञ्च भक्षणे रेतोमूत्रपुरीषाणां प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् ४६
What is the expiation for consuming things that should not be eaten, things that should not be drunk or licked, and substances such as semen, urine, and feces? ४६

पद्मोडम्बरविल्वाश्च कुशाश्वत्थपलाशकाः एतेषामुदकं पीत्वा षड्रात्रेणैव शुध्यति ४७
By drinking water infused with lotus, udumbara, bilva, kuśa, aśvattha, and palāśa, one becomes purified within six nights. ४७

यः प्रत्यवसितोविप्रः प्रव्रज्याग्निर्निरापदि अनाहिताग्निर्वर्त्तत गृहित्वञ्च चिकीर्षति ४८
A Brāhmaṇa who has abandoned the life of renunciation, whose sacred fire has been extinguished, and who, without maintaining the prescribed fire, wishes to return to household life— ४८

आचरेत्त्रीणि कृच्छ्राणि चरेच्चान्द्रायणानि च जातकर्मादिभिः प्रोक्तैः पुनः संस्कारमर्हति ४९
should perform three Kṛcchra expiations and three Cāndrāyaṇas; thereafter he is entitled to undergo the prescribed rites of re-consecration beginning with Jātakarma. ४९

तूलिका उपधानानि पुष्पं रक्ताम्बराणि च तूलिका उपधानानि पुष्पं रक्ताम्बराणि च शोषयित्वा प्रतापेन प्रोक्षयित्वा शुचिर्भवेत् ५०
Cotton bedding, cushions, flowers, and red garments, having been dried by heat and then sprinkled with sanctified water, become purified. ५०

--- Page 5 ---

देशं कालं तथात्मानं द्रव्यं द्रव्यप्रयोजनम् उपपत्तिमवस्थाञ्च ज्ञात्वा धर्मं समाचरेत् ५१
Knowing the place, time, oneself, the substance, the purpose of the substance, its suitability, and the circumstances, one should practice dharma. ५१

रथ्याकर्द्दमतोयानि नावायस तृणानि च मारुतार्केण शुध्यन्ति पक्वेष्टकचितानि च ५२
Mud, water, and refuse from roads, boats, iron, and grass are purified by wind and sunlight, as are things made of baked bricks. ५२

आतुरे स्त्रानसम्प्राप्ते दशकृत्वोह्यनातुरः स्त्रात्वा स्त्रात्वा स्पृशेत्तन्तु ततः शुध्येत आतुरः ५३
When a sick person is unable to bathe, a healthy person should bathe ten times and touch him; thereafter the sick person becomes purified. ५३

रजकश्चर्मकारश्च नटोवुरुड एव च कैवर्त्तमेदभिल्लाश्च सप्तैते चान्त्यजाः स्मृताः ५४
The washerman, leather-worker, actor, Vuruda, Kaivarta, Meda, and Bhilla—these seven are remembered as Antyajas. ५४

एषां गत्वा तु योषां वै तप्तकृच्छ्रं समाचरेत् ५५
A woman who goes to one of these men should undertake the Taptakṛcchra penance. ५५

स्त्रीणां रजस्वलानान्तु स्पृष्टास्पृष्टि यदा भवेत् प्रायश्चित्तं कथं तासां वर्णे वर्णे विधीयते ५६
When menstruating women come into contact with one another, what expiation is prescribed for them according to their respective varṇas? ५६

स्पृष्ट्वा रजस्वलां यान्तु सगोत्राञ्च सभर्तृकाम् कामादकामतो वापि स्त्रात्वा कालेन शुध्यति ५७
If one touches a menstruating woman of the same gotra who has a husband, whether intentionally or unintentionally, one becomes purified by bathing at the proper time. ५७

स्पृष्ट्वा रजस्वलान्योन्यं ब्राह्मणी शूद्रजा तथा कृच्छ्रेण शुध्यते पूर्वा शूद्रा पादेन शुध्यति ५८
If a Brāhmaṇa woman and a Śūdra woman touch one another while menstruating, the former is purified by performing a Kṛcchra, while the Śūdra woman is purified by performing a quarter-Kṛcchra. ५८

स्पृष्ट्वा रजस्वलान्योन्यं क्षत्रिया शूद्रजा तथा पादहीनं चरेत् पूर्वा पादार्द्धन्तु तथोत्तरा ५९
If a Kṣatriya woman and a Śūdra woman touch one another while menstruating, the former should perform a penance one quarter less than a Kṛcchra, while the latter should perform half of a quarter-Kṛcchra. ५९

स्पृष्टा रजस्वलान्योन्यं वैश्यजा शूद्रजा तथा कृच्छ्रपादं चरेत् पूर्वा तदर्द्धन्तु तथोत्तरा ६०
If a Vaiśya woman and a Śūdra woman touch one another while menstruating, the former should perform a quarter-Kṛcchra, while the latter should perform half of that. ६०

स्पृष्टा रजस्वला चैव श्वाजजम्बूकरासभैः तावत्तिष्ठेन्निराहारा स्त्रात्वा कालेन शुध्यति ६१
If a menstruating woman is touched by a dog, jackal, or donkey, she should remain without food for that prescribed period and becomes purified by bathing at the proper time. ६१

स्पृष्टा रजस्वला कैश्चिच्चाण्डालैररजस्वला प्राजापत्येन कृच्छ्रेण प्राणायामशतेन च ६२
If a menstruating woman is touched by a Cāṇḍāla, or a non-menstruating woman is touched by one, purification is prescribed through a Prājāpatya Kṛcchra and one hundred prāṇāyāmas. ६२

विप्रः स्पृष्टोनिशायाञ्च उदक्या पतितेन च दिवानीतेन तोयेन स्त्रापयेच्चाग्निसन्निधौ ६३
A Brāhmaṇa who is touched at night by a menstruating woman or by an outcast should be bathed with water brought during the day, in the presence of fire. ६३

दिवार्क रश्मिसंस्पृष्टं रात्रौ नक्षत्ररश्मिभिः सन्ध्योभयोश्च सन्ध्यायाः पवित्रं सर्वदा जलम् ६४
Water touched by the rays of the sun during the day, by the rays of the stars at night, and by the twilight at both junctions is always considered purifying. ६४

--- Page 6 ---

अपः करनखस्पृष्टाः पिबेदाचमने द्विजः सुरां पिबति सुव्यक्तं यमस्य वचनं यथा ६५
A twice-born person should drink water touched by the tips of the fingernails only for ācamana; otherwise, he is clearly said to be drinking liquor, according to the statement of Yama. ६५

खातवाप्योस्तथा कूपे पाषाणैः शस्त्रघातनैः यष्टया तु घातने चैव मृत्पिण्डे गोकुलेन च ६६
Likewise, when a cow dies in a dug reservoir or well through being struck with stones or weapons, or through being struck with a staff, or through being hit by a clod of earth or by a herd of cattle, [the prescribed expiation should be performed]. ६६

रोधने बन्धने चैव स्थापिते पुष्कले तथा काष्ठे वनस्पतौ रोधसङ्कटे रज्जुवस्त्रयोः ६७
Likewise, [when a cow dies] through obstruction, confinement, being tied, being placed upon a heap, through wood or a tree, or through becoming entangled in a bank, a rope, or cloth, [the prescribed expiation should be performed]. ६७

एतत्ते कथितं सर्वं प्रमादस्थानमुत्तमम् यत्र यत्र मृता गावः प्रायश्चित्तं समाचरेत् ६८
All these circumstances of accidental death have been explained to you; wherever cows have died in such ways, one should perform the prescribed expiation. ६८

दारुणा घातने कृच्छ्रं पाषाणैर्द्विगुणं भवेत् अर्द्धकृच्छ्रन्तु खाते स्यात् पादकृच्छ्रन्तु पादपे ६९
For killing by a piece of wood, one should perform a Kṛcchra; when caused by stones, it should be twice as much. In the case of a pit, a half-Kṛcchra is prescribed, and in the case of a tree, a quarter-Kṛcchra. ६९

शस्त्रघाते त्रिकृच्छ्राणि यष्टिघाते द्वयं चरेत् ७०
For a death caused by a weapon, three Kṛcchras should be performed; for one caused by a staff, two should be performed. ७०

कृच्छ्रेण वस्त्रघातेऽपि गोघ्नश्चेति विशुध्यति योवर्त्तयति गोमध्ये नदीकान्तारमन्तिके ७१
Even when a cow is killed by cloth, the killer of the cow becomes purified by performing a Kṛcchra, as does one who drives a cow into the midst of a river or near a forest wilderness. ७१

रोमाणि प्रथमे पादे द्वितीये श्मश्रु वापयेत् तृतीये तु शिखा धार्या चतुर्थे सशिखं वपेत् ७२
In the first quarter, the body hair should be shaved; in the second, the beard should be shaved; in the third, the śikhā should be retained; and in the fourth, the head should be shaved together with the śikhā. ७२

न स्त्रीणां वपनं कुर्यात् न च सा गामनुव्रजेत् न च रात्रौ वसेद्गोष्ठे न कुर्याद् वैदिकीं श्रुतिम् ७३
A woman should not have her head shaved, nor should she follow the cow; she should not stay in the cowshed at night, nor should she recite Vedic scripture. ७३

सर्वान् केशान् समुद्धत्य छेदयेदङ्गुलिद्वयम् एवमेव तु नारीणां शिरसो वपनं स्मृतम् ७४
Gathering all the hair together, she should cut off two finger-widths of it; this is likewise prescribed as the shaving of a woman's head. ७४

मृतकेन तु जातेन उभयोः सूतकं भवेत् पातकेन तु लिप्तेन नास्य सूतकिता भवेत् ७५
When a dead child is born, impurity arises for both [the mother and the family]; but when one is tainted by sin, no period of birth impurity is incurred on that account. ७५

चत्वारि खलु कर्माणि सन्ध्याकाले विवर्जयेत् आहारं मैथुनं निद्रां स्वाध्यायञ्च चतुर्थकम् ७६
At twilight, one should indeed avoid four activities: eating, sexual intercourse, sleep, and, as the fourth, Vedic study. ७६

आहाराज्जायते व्याधिः क्रूरगर्भश्च मैथुने निद्रा श्रियो निवर्त्तन्ते स्वाध्याये मरणं ध्रुवम् ७७
From eating [at that time] disease arises; from sexual intercourse, a cruel or afflicted offspring; from sleep, prosperity departs; and from Vedic study at that time, death is certain. ७७

अज्ञानात्तु द्विजश्रेष्ठ वर्णानां हितकाम्यया मया प्रोक्तमिदं शास्त्रं सावधानोऽवधारय ७८
O best of the twice-born, out of a desire for the welfare of the varṇas, I have taught this scripture despite [possible] ignorance; therefore, listen to and understand it attentively. ७८

इति यमप्रोक्तं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम्
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra spoken by Yama.


