--- Page 1 ---
।। श्रीगणेशाय नमः ॥
Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

* दाल्भ्यस्मृतिः *
  The Dālbhya Smṛti.

दाल्भ्यम्प्रतिऋषीणां धर्मविषयकः प्रश्नः
The sages’ questions to Dālbhya concerning Dharma.

कृताभिषेकं दाल्भ्यं स्वे आश्रमे समुपस्थितम् । परिपृच्छन्ति तत्वज्ञं ऋषयो वेदपारगाः ॥ १॥
The sages, learned in the Vedas, approached Dālbhya, who had completed his ritual bath and had returned to his own hermitage, and questioned him, the knower of truth. ॥ १॥

धर्माधर्मविवेकं च शुद्धिर्जातमृतस्य च । आयुष्यानि च तीर्थानि मासशुद्धिस्तथैव च ॥२॥
Tell us about the discernment between Dharma and Adharma, purification following birth and death, life-enhancing sacred places, and the purification of the months. ॥२॥

श्राद्धकालं च ब्रह्मन्नगोन्नचण्डालसंकरम् । रसानां परिवेत्ता च कथयस्व यथायथम् ॥ ३ ॥
O Brahman, tell us properly about the proper time for Śrāddha, the mixing of cows, food, and Chāṇḍālas, and the person who consumes or deals with the various food-flavours. ॥ ३ ॥

स्मृतिसारं प्रवक्ष्यामि यथा शङ्खन भाषितम् । इष्टापूर्तविधिश्चैव प्रायश्चित्तविधिस्तथा ॥ ४ ॥
I shall explain the essence of the Smṛti as spoken by Śaṅkha, including the rules concerning Iṣṭa and Pūrta, as well as the rules concerning expiation. ॥ ४ ॥

इष्टापूर्ती तु कर्तव्यौ ब्राह्मणेन प्रयत्नतः । इष्टेन लभते मोक्षं पूर्ते स्वर्गोऽभिधीयते ॥५॥
A Brāhmaṇa should diligently perform both Iṣṭa and Pūrta. Through Iṣṭa one attains liberation, while through Pūrta, heaven is said to be attained. ॥५॥

एकाहमपि कौन्तेय भूमिस्थमुदकं कुरु । कुलानि तारयेत्सप्त यत्र गौ वितृषा भवेत् ॥ ६ ॥
O Kaunteya, establish even for a single day a source of water upon the earth where a cow can quench her thirst; it will deliver seven generations of one's family. ॥ ६ ॥

भूमिदानेन ये लोका गोदानेन च कीर्तिताः । तान् लोकान् प्राप्नुयान्मर्त्यः पादपानां प्ररोहणे ॥ ७ ॥
The worlds that are said to be attained through the gift of land and the gift of cows are attained by a mortal who causes trees and plants to grow. ॥ ७ ॥

वापीकूपतड़ागानि देवतायतनानि च । पतितान्युद्धरेद्यस्तु स पूर्तफलमश्नुते ॥ ८ ॥
Whoever restores fallen or ruined wells, reservoirs, ponds, and temples of the deities attains the fruit of Pūrta. ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 2 ---

अग्निहोत्रं तपः सत्यं देवानां प्रतिपालनम् । आतिथ्यं वैश्वदेवश्च इष्टमित्यभिधीयते ॥९ ॥
Agnihotra, austerity, truthfulness, the protection and proper observance of duties toward the gods, hospitality, and the Vaiśvadeva offering are called Iṣṭa. ॥९ ॥

इष्टापूतौं द्विजातीनां सामान्यौ धर्मसाधकौ । अधिकारी भवेच्छूद्रः पूर्ने धर्म न वैदिके ॥१०॥
Iṣṭa and Pūrta are the common means of fulfilling Dharma for the twice-born; a Śūdra is also qualified to perform Pūrta, but not Vedic rites. ॥१०॥

यावदस्थोनि गंगायां तिष्ठन्ति पुरुषस्य च। तावद्वर्षसहस्राणि स्वर्गलोके महीयते ॥११॥
For as many years as the bones of a man remain in the waters of the Ganges, for that many thousands of years he is honored in the heavenly world. ॥११॥

देवानां च पितॄणां च जले दद्याज्जलाञ्जलीन् । असंस्कृतप्रमीतानां स्थले दद्याज्जलाञ्जलीन् ।।१२।।
Water offerings should be given in water to the gods and the ancestors; water offerings for those who have died without receiving the prescribed rites should be given upon the ground. ॥१२॥

केशकीटकशंबू कम स्थिकंटकमेव च । स्थलेषु च न दातव्यं कदाचिदशुचिर्भवेत् ॥१३॥
An offering should never be given on the ground where there are hair, insects, shells, bones, thorns, or similar impurities, for it would become impure. ॥१३॥

वामहस्ते तिलान् स्थाप्य यस्तु तर्पयते पितॄन् । पितरस्तर्पितास्तेन रुधिरेण जलेन वा ।।१४।।
Whoever places sesame seeds in his left hand and offers them in the ancestral rite is said to have offered to the ancestors with blood or impure water rather than with the proper offering. ॥१४॥

एकादेव (मेव) ऋषीणां तु द्वौ द्वौ तु सनकादयः । अर्हन्ति पितरस्त्रीन्स्त्रीनस्त्रियश्चैकैकमंजलिम् ॥१५॥
The Ṛṣis are entitled to one offering each; Sanaka and the others to two each; the ancestors are entitled to three handfuls each, while women are entitled to one handful each. ॥१५॥

नाभिमात्रे जले स्थित्वा सतिलं दक्षिणामुखः । त्रींस्त्रीनपोऽञ्जलीन् दद्यादुच्चैरुच्चतरं द्विजः ।।१६।॥
Standing in water up to the navel, facing south and holding sesame seeds, the twice-born should offer three handfuls of water to each, raising the hands progressively higher. ॥१६॥

जले चैव जलं देयं पितॄणां जलकाङ्‌क्षिणाम् । ततःस्थलेषु दातव्यं पितृतॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥१७।।
Water should be offered in water to the ancestors who desire water; afterward it should be offered upon the ground, where the water-offering to the ancestors does not reach them. ॥१७॥

नोदकेषु च पात्रेषु नाशुद्धो नैकपाणिना । नोपतिष्ठति तत्तोयं यभूम्यां न प्रदीयते ॥१८॥
The water does not reach the ancestors when it is offered in an improper place, in vessels, by an impure person, or with only one hand; therefore it should be properly offered upon the ground. ॥१८॥

एकादशाहे प्रेतस्य यस्य चोत्सृज्यते वृषः । मुच्यते प्रेतलोकाच्च स्वर्गलोकं स गच्छति ॥१९ ॥
When a bull is released on the eleventh day after a person's death, the deceased is freed from the realm of the departed and goes to the heavenly world. ॥१९ ॥

--- Page 3 ---

यष्टव्या बहवः पुत्रा यद्य कोऽपि गयां व्रजेन । यजेत वा अश्वमेधं नीलं वा वृपमुत्सृजेत ॥२०॥
Many sons should be desired, even if only one of them goes to Gayā. Or one should perform the Aśvamedha sacrifice, or release a blue bull. ॥२०॥

लोहितो यस्तु वर्णेन मुखे पुच्छे च पाण्डुरः । श्वेतः खुरविषाणाभ्यां स नीलो नृप उच्यते ॥२१॥
A bull that is reddish in color, with a pale face and tail, and white hooves and horns is called a Nīla bull. ॥२१॥

प्रथमेऽह्नि तृतीये च पंचमे सप्तमे तथा । नवमैकादशे श्राद्ध तन्नवश्राद्धमुच्यते ॥ २२॥
Śrāddha performed on the first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh days is called Navaśrāddha. ॥२२॥

नवश्राद्ध त्रिपक्षे च षण्मासे मासिकाब्दिके । पतन्ति पितरस्तस्य यो भुक्तं चापदि द्विजः ॥२३॥
The Navaśrāddha, the Śrāddha performed during the three fortnights, the six-monthly, monthly, and annual Śrāddhas are prescribed; if a twice-born neglects these, his ancestors fall. ॥२३॥

मासिकानि यश द्वेस्यादाद्यष्टे ह्यर्थमासिके । ऊनषाण्मासिको नाब्दे श्राद्ध' संख्यास्तु पोडश ॥२४॥
There are monthly Śrāddhas, including the first one, the eighth half-monthly observance, the incomplete six-monthly Śrāddha, and the annual Śrāddha; thus the number of Śrāddhas is sixteen. ॥२४॥

मृतेऽहनि तु कर्तव्यं प्रतिमासं तु वत्सरम् । प्रतिसंवत्सरं चैवमाद्यमेकादशेऽहनि ॥२५॥
The rites should be performed on the day of death, every month for one year, and thereafter every year; the first of these is to be performed on the eleventh day. ॥२५॥

यस्यैतानि न कुर्वीत एकोद्दिष्टानि पोडश । पिशाचत्वं स्थिरं तस्य दत्तः श्राद्धशतैरपि ॥२६॥
Whoever does not perform these sixteen Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddhas remains fixed in the state of a Piśāca, even if hundreds of Śrāddhas are subsequently offered. ॥२६॥

सपिण्डीकरणादूध्वं यत्र यत्र प्रदीयते । तत्र तत्र त्रयं कुर्यादेकतस्तु क्षयेऽहनि ॥२७॥
After the Sapindīkaraṇa, wherever the Śrāddha is performed, three offerings should be made there; but on the day of the monthly decline, one should be offered. ॥२७॥

एकोद्दिष्ट परित्यज्य पार्वणं कुरुते तु यः । अकृतं तद्विजानीयात्समा तृपितृघातकः ॥२८॥
Whoever abandons the Ekoddiṣṭa rite and performs the Pārvaṇa instead should be regarded as having left the rite undone; such a person is considered a destroyer of his ancestors. ॥२८॥

नित्यं नैमित्तिकं कार्य नित्यं तु परिलंघयेत् । आदौ नैमित्तिकं कुर्यात्पश्चान्नित्यं समाचरेत् ॥२९।।
The Nitya and Naimittika rites should both be performed; the Nitya rite should not be neglected. When both coincide, the Naimittika rite should be performed first, and the Nitya rite afterward. ॥२९॥

अमायां तु क्षयो यस्य प्रेतपक्षेऽथवा यदि । सपिण्डीकरणादृध्वं तस्योक्तः पार्वणो विधिः ॥३०॥
If the monthly observance falls on the new-moon day or during the Pitṛpakṣa, then after Sapindīkaraṇa the Pārvaṇa procedure is prescribed for him. ॥३०॥

--- Page 4 ---


त्रिदण्डग्रहणादेव प्रेतत्वं नैव जायते । एकादशदिने पूर्ण पार्वणं तु विधीयते ॥३१।।
The state of being a departed spirit does not arise merely from the taking up of the threefold staff. On the eleventh day, the complete Pārvaṇa rite is prescribed. ॥३१॥

यस्य संवत्सरार्वाक् सपिण्डीकरणं कृतम् । प्रतिमासं तथा तस्य प्रतिसंवत्सरं तथा ।।३२।।
For one whose Sapindīkaraṇa has been performed before the completion of a year, the rites should likewise be performed every month and thereafter every year. ॥३२॥

तस्याप्यन्नं सोदकुंभं दद्यात्संवत्सरं द्विजः । नित्यत्वात् कुलधर्माणां पुंसां चैवायुषः क्षयात् ॥३३॥
The twice-born should offer food together with a water-filled vessel to him for one year, because the duties of the family are perpetual and the lifespan of human beings is subject to decline. ॥३३॥

अस्थिरत्वाच्छरीरस्य द्वादशाहः प्रशस्यते । मातुः सपिण्डीकरणं कथं कार्य भवेत्सुतैः ॥३४॥
Because the body is impermanent, the twelfth day is considered auspicious for the rite. How should the Sapindīkaraṇa of the mother be performed by her sons? ॥३४॥

पितामह्या सहैतस्याः सपिण्डीकरणं स्मृतम् । पतिनैकेन कर्तव्यं सपिण्डीकरणं स्त्रियः ॥३५॥
Her Sapindīkaraṇa is prescribed together with that of the paternal grandmother. For a woman, the Sapindīkaraṇa should be performed by her husband alone. ॥३५॥

सा मृतापि हि पत्यैक्यं मांसमज्जास्थिभिः सहः । मातुः प्रथमतः पिण्डं निर्वपेत् पुत्रिकासुतः ॥३६॥
Even after her death, she remains united with her husband through flesh, marrow, and bones. A daughter's son should first offer the piṇḍa to his mother. ॥३६॥

द्वितीयं तु पितुस्तस्यास्तृतीयं तु पितुः पितुः । अथ चेन्मन्त्रविद्युक्तः शारीरैः पङ्क्तिदूषकैः ॥३७।।
The second should be offered to her father, and the third to her father's father. But if one is endowed with knowledge of the mantras, even if afflicted by bodily defects that would ordinarily defile the ritual row, ॥३७॥

अदुष्यं (दू१) तं यमः प्राह प‌ङ्क्तिपावन एव सः । अग्नौ करणशेषं तु पितृपात्रेषु दापयेत् ॥३८॥
Yama declares him to be free from impurity and indeed a purifier of the ritual assembly. The remainder of the offering made into the fire should be placed in the vessels intended for the ancestors. ॥३८॥

पितृपात्रं पितॄणां च न दद्याद्वैश्वदेविके । मृन्मयेषु (ण्म) च पात्रेषु श्राद्धे भोजयते पितॄन् ॥३९ ॥
The vessels belonging to the ancestors should not be used for the Vaiśvadeva offering. One should not feed the ancestors during Śrāddha using earthen vessels. ॥३९॥

दातुश्च नोपतिष्ठेत भोक्ता च नरकं व्रजेत् । हस्तदत्तं तु यत् स्नेहलवणव्यंजनादिकम् ॥४०॥
Such an offering does not reach the giver, and the one who consumes it goes to hell. Whatever is directly handed over by hand, such as oil, salt, condiments, and similar items, ॥४०॥

दातुश्च नोपतिष्ठेत भोक्ता भुंजीत किल्बिपम् । गण्डूषकरणात् पूर्व हस्तं प्रक्षालये‌द्विजः ॥४१॥
does not reach the giver, and the one who consumes it incurs sin. Before rinsing the mouth, the twice-born should wash his hands. ॥४१॥

--- Page 5 ---

हतं देवं च पित्र्यं च आत्मानं चोपपातकैः । द्विस्त्रिः पिबति गण्डूषं ब्राह्मणो ज्ञानदुर्बलः ।॥४२॥
The divine rite, the ancestral rite, and the person himself are all rendered ineffective by such minor transgressions. A Brāhmaṇa who is weak in knowledge should rinse his mouth by drinking the water twice or thrice. ॥४२॥

हतं दैवं च पित्र्यं च आत्मानं चोपपातकैः । अर्ध पिबति गण्डूषमर्थं त्यजति भूमिषु ॥४३॥।
The divine rite, the ancestral rite, and the person himself are rendered ineffective by such transgressions. He should drink half of the mouthful of water and discard the other half upon the ground. ॥४३॥

प्रीणन्ति पितरः सर्वे ये चान्ये भूमिदेवताः । हस्तवाताहतं धूपं श्राद्ध यः संप्रदास्यति ॥४४॥
All the ancestors and the other deities presiding over the earth are pleased when incense is offered at the Śrāddha; it should not be disturbed by the wind produced from the hand. ॥४४॥

हतं दैवं च पित्र्यं च आत्मानं चोपपातकैः । पवित्रग्रन्थिमुत्सृज्य निक्षिपेभूमिमण्डले ॥४५॥
The divine rite, the ancestral rite, and the person himself are rendered ineffective by such transgressions. Having removed the sacred knot, one should place it upon the ground. ॥४५॥

प्रक्षिपेद्भाजने विप्रो भ्रूणहत्यां स विति । पिता च म्रियते यस्य जीवेत च पितामहः ।॥४६।।
If a Brāhmaṇa places it in a vessel, he is said to incur the sin of destroying a foetus. When a person's father dies while his grandfather is still living, ॥४६॥

द्वौ पिण्डावेकनामानावेकस्मिन् प्रपितामहे । पितॄणां त्रीणि पूर्वाणां पिता च वमते यदि ॥४७॥
two piṇḍas bearing the same name should be offered to the same great-grandfather. If the father vomits the offerings intended for the three preceding ancestors, ॥४७॥

तद्दिनं चोपवासश्च पुनः श्राद्ध परेऽहनि । जानुपातं बहिः पाणि हुंकारं तर्जनं बलिम् ॥४८॥
there should be fasting on that day, and the Śrāddha should be performed again on the following day. Stretching the hands outside up to the knees, making a “huṃ” sound, threatening, and offering the bali ॥४८॥

हस्तावलीढनं कुर्याच्छ्राद्धघाती प्रजायते । पानीयं पिबतः पात्रे मुखतो गलितं यदि ॥४६॥
If one touches or licks the offering with the hand, he becomes a destroyer of the Śrāddha. If water falls from the mouth of one who is drinking from a vessel, ॥४६॥

हसते वदते चैव निराशाः पित्तरो गताः । बर्बरीकुसुमं चैव केतकीकरवीरकम् ॥५०।।
if he laughs or speaks while doing so, the ancestors depart disappointed. The flowers of Barbarī, Ketakī, and Karavīra, ॥५०॥

जाती दर्शनमात्रेण निराशाः पितरो गताः । तुलसी शतपत्राणि भृंगराजस्तथैव च ॥५१॥
and even the mere sight of Jātī flowers causes the ancestors to depart disappointed. Tulasi, Śatapatra, and Bhṛṅgarāja, ॥५१॥

मारुतं मोगरं चैव पितॄणां दत्तमक्षयम् । कुलित्थाशणकाढक्यो मसूरा याव नालकाः ॥५२॥
Māruta and Mogara flowers, when offered to the ancestors, are imperishable offerings. Kulittha, Aśaṇaka, Āḍhakī, Masūra, and Yāva-Nālaka ॥५२॥

--- Page 6 ---

निः पावा राजमाषाश्च नन्ति श्राद्धः पतत्यधः । श्राद्ध वै मृन्मयं (मृण्मयं) पात्रं मृत्तिकायाश्च लेपनम् ॥५३॥
Niṣpāva and Rājamāṣa cause the Śrāddha to fall down and become ineffective. In Śrāddha, an earthen vessel and a coating of clay should be used. ॥५३॥

साज्यं धूपं घृतं चैव निराशाः पितरो गताः । क्षारस्य तु यल्लवणमुच्छिष्टस्य तु यद्धृतम् ॥५४॥
When clarified butter, incense, or ghee is offered improperly, the ancestors depart disappointed. Salt that has been contaminated by alkaline substances, and ghee that has become leftover food, ॥५४॥

मुखेन श्रमितं भुंक्त द्विजश्चान्द्रायणं चरेत् । अंगुल्या दन्तधावेन प्रत्यक्ष लवणेन च ।।५५।।
If a twice-born person eats food that has been touched by the mouth, he should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. Cleaning the teeth with the finger and consuming salt directly are likewise prohibited. ॥५५॥

मृत्तिकाभक्षणं चैव तुल्यं गोमांसभक्षणम् । श्राद्ध कृत्वा परश्राद्ध यस्तु भुञ्जीत लोलुपः ॥५६॥
Eating clay is considered equal to eating beef. Whoever, out of greed, eats at another person's Śrāddha after having performed a Śrāddha himself, ॥५६॥

पतन्ति पितरस्तस्य लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः । श्राद्ध कृत्वा तु यो विप्रो नंब भुंक्त कदाचन ॥५७৷৷
his ancestors fall, and the rites of offering piṇḍas and water to them are lost. But the Brāhmaṇa who, having performed a Śrāddha, does not eat again, ॥५७॥

हव्यं देवा न गृह्णन्ति कव्यानि पितरस्तथा । पुनर्मोजनमध्वानं भाराध्ययनमेथुनम् ॥५८॥
the gods do not accept the havya offering, nor do the ancestors accept the kavya offering. Repeated eating, travelling, carrying burdens, studying, and sexual intercourse ॥५८॥

दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः श्राद्धभुगष्ट वर्जयेत् । श्राद्ध नियुक्तो भुक्त्वा च भोजयित्वाभिगम्य च ॥५९ ॥
along with giving gifts, accepting gifts, performing homa, and eating Śrāddha food—these eight should be avoided. One who has been appointed to partake in a Śrāddha, after eating and feeding others, should not approach a woman sexually. ॥५९॥

व्यवायी रेतसो गर्ने मज्जयत्यात्मनः पितॄन् । देवपूर्वभवेच्छाद्धमदैवं चापि यद्भवेत् ॥६०॥
A man who engages in sexual intercourse sinks his own ancestors into the mire of semen. A Śrāddha should first be performed for the gods, and thereafter the ancestral Śrāddha. ॥६०॥

ब्रह्मचारी भवेद्भुक्त्वा भुक्त्वा श्रद्ध ं च नेत्तिकम् । पितृपात्रं समुत्सृष्ट्वा (ज्य) पिण्डांस्तत्र प्रदापयेत् ।।६१।।
After eating, one should observe celibacy and should not eat again in connection with the Śrāddha. Having set aside the vessel of the ancestors, the piṇḍas should be offered there. ॥६१॥

अपुत्रा ये मृताः केचित् स्त्रियो वा पुरुषास्तथा । तेषां श्राद्ध तु कर्तव्यमेकोद्दिष्ट पार्वणम् ॥ ६२॥
For those who have died without children, whether women or men, Śrāddha should be performed for them, both the Ekoddiṣṭa and the Pārvaṇa rites. ॥६२॥

सूतकांतरितं श्राद्ध प्रमादाद्ङ्गलितं तथा । तद्दिनाद्वादशाहे वा कुर्यात् तन्मासपर्वणि ॥६३॥
If a Śrāddha is interrupted because of a period of impurity, or is omitted through negligence, it should be performed on the twelfth day from that day, or at the monthly Śrāddha occasion. ॥६३॥

--- Page 7 ---

प्रत्यव्दं पार्वणे नैव विधिना क्षेत्रजोरसौ । कुर्यात्तामितरे कुयुरेकोद्दिष्ट सुतादश ।।६४।।
Every year, at the Pārvaṇa Śrāddha, the Kṣetraja and Aurasa sons should perform it according to the prescribed procedure; the other sons should perform the Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha, up to the tenth son. ॥६४॥

द्वौ देवे प्राक्क्रयः पित्र्ये उद्‌गेकैकमेव वा। मातामहानामप्येवं तन्त्रं वा वैश्वदेविकम् ॥६५॥
Two offerings should first be made to the gods, and one or two to the ancestors. The same procedure applies to the maternal grandfathers; alternatively, the Vaiśvadevika procedure may be followed. ॥६५॥

बहूनामपि बन्धूनामेकश्चेत् पुत्रवान् भवेत् । सर्वे ते तेन पुत्रेण पुत्रिणो मनुरब्रवीत् ॥६६॥
Even among many relatives, if one of them has a son, all of them are regarded as having a son through that son, so says Manu. ॥६६॥

बहूनामेक भार्याणामेका चेत् पुत्रिणी भवेत् । सर्वास्तास्तेन पुत्रेण पुत्रवत्य इति स्थितिः ॥६७॥
If, among several wives of one man, one has a son, all of them are regarded as having a son through that son; such is the established rule. ॥६७॥

अष्टकासु च वृद्धौ च प्रेतपक्षे क्षयेऽहनि । मातुः श्राद्ध ं पृथक् कुर्यादन्यत्र पतिना सह ॥६८॥
During the Aṣṭakās, on occasions of prosperity, during the Pitṛpakṣa, and on the day of the lunar decline, the Śrāddha for the mother should be performed separately; at other times it should be performed together with that of the father. ॥६८॥

अन्वष्टक्यं च पूर्वद्युर्मासि मास्यथ पार्वणम् । काम्यमाभ्युद्यमाष्टम्यामेकोद्दिष्टमथाष्टमम् ॥६९॥
The Anvaṣṭakya Śrāddha should be performed on the preceding day; the monthly Śrāddha should be performed each month, and the Pārvaṇa Śrāddha according to its prescribed time. A desired Śrāddha may be performed on the eighth day of the bright fortnight, and an Ekoddiṣṭa on the eighth day. ॥६९॥

चतुर्थाद्यषु साम्नीनामग्नौ होमो विधीयते । पित्रियद्विजपाणौ च उत्तरेषु चतुष्वपि ॥७०॥
From the fourth day onward, the Sāmans are prescribed to be offered into the sacred fire; for the ancestral rites, they are to be offered into the hands of the Brāhmaṇa, and likewise on each of the following four occasions. ॥७०॥

यच पाणितले दत्तं यच्चान्यदुपकल्पितम् । एकीभावेन भोक्तत्र्यं पृथग्भावो न विद्यते ॥७१॥
Whatever is placed in the palm and whatever else has been prepared should be consumed together; they are not to be treated as separate. ॥७१॥

प्रतिपत्प्रभृतिष्वेकां वर्जयित्वा चतुर्दशीम् । शस्त्रेणैव हता ये तु तेषां तत्र प्रदीयते ॥७२॥
Beginning with Pratipadā, except on the fourteenth day, offerings are made on these days for those who were killed by weapons. ॥७२॥

मासिकेऽब्दे तु संप्राप्त अंतरामृतसूतके । वदन्ति शुद्धौ तत्कार्य दर्श वापि मनीषिणः ॥७३॥
If, when the monthly or annual Śrāddha arrives, an intervening death or birth impurity occurs, the learned declare that the rite should be performed after purification, or on the tenth day. ॥७३॥

श्राद्ध ऽहनि समुत्पन्ने मृतस्याविदिते दिने । एकादश्यां तु कर्तव्यं कृष्णपक्षे विशेषतः ।।७४।।
If the death occurs on the day appointed for the Śrāddha and the exact day of death is unknown, the Śrāddha should be performed on the eleventh day, particularly during the dark fortnight. ॥७४॥

--- Page 8 ---


समत्वमागतस्यापि पितुः शस्त्रहतस्य च । एकोद्दिष्ट सुतैः कार्य चतुर्दश्यां महालये ॥७५।।
Even for a father who has attained equality with others and who was killed by a weapon, the sons should perform the Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha on the fourteenth day during the Mahālaya. ॥७५॥

महालये गयाश्राद्ध मातापित्रोः क्षयेऽहनि । कृतोद्वाहोऽपि कुर्वीत पिंडदानं यथाविधि ॥७६॥
During the Mahālaya, the Gayā Śrāddha, and on the lunar day of the death of the mother or father, even one who has undergone marriage should perform the offering of piṇḍas according to the prescribed procedure. ॥७६॥

एकोद्दिष्ट दैवहीनमेकाध्यैकपवित्रकम् । आवाहनानौ करणरहितं त्वपसव्यवत् ॥७७॥
The Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha is without the rites for the gods, has a single Pavitra, is without the invocation and fire-offering, and is performed in the Apasavya manner. ॥७७॥

संकल्पं तु यदा कुर्यान्न कुर्यात्पा अपूरणम् । नावाहनाग्नौ करणं पिण्डांश्चैव न दापयेत् ॥७८॥
When the Saṅkalpa has been made, no incomplete observance should be performed. There should be neither invocation nor fire-offering, and the piṇḍas should not be offered. ॥७८॥

विवाहव्रतबंधोर्ध्वं वर्षमब्दार्थमेव वा । पिण्डान्सपिण्डान् नो दधु र्न कुर्युस्तिलतर्पणम् ॥७९।।
For one year, or for half a year, after marriage or the investiture with a religious vow, the piṇḍas should not be offered to the Sapinda ancestors, nor should Tila-tarpaṇa be performed. ॥७९॥

नित्यश्राद्धमदैवं स्यादयपिण्डविवर्जितं । आमश्राद्ध ं तु नैव स्याच्छूद्रः कुर्यात्सदैव हि ॥८०॥
The daily Śrāddha is to be without the rites for the gods and without piṇḍas. The Āma-Śrāddha should not be performed by a Brāhmaṇa; a Śūdra, however, should always perform it. ॥८०॥

अपत्नीकः प्रवासी च यस्य भार्या रजस्वला । आमश्राद्धो द्विजः कुर्याच्छूद्रः कुर्यात्सदैव हि ॥८१॥
A twice-born man who is without his wife, away from home, or whose wife is menstruating should perform the Āma-Śrāddha; a Śūdra should always perform it. ॥८१॥

या संख्या पक्कपाकस्य शुष्कं तद्विगुणं भवेत् । चतुर्गुणं हिरण्यं तु श्राद्धकर्मणि संस्थितम् ॥८२॥
Whatever the quantity of cooked food is prescribed, the quantity of dry food should be twice as much, while gold should be four times as much in the performance of the Śrāddha. ॥८२॥

मातुः श्राद्धं तु पूर्व स्यात् पितॄणां तदनन्तरम् । ततो मातामहानां च वृद्धौ श्राद्धत्रयं स्मृतम् ॥८३॥
The Śrāddha for the mother should be performed first, that for the paternal ancestors thereafter, and then that for the maternal grandfathers; on occasions of prosperity, these three Śrāddhas are prescribed. ॥८३॥

दशकृत्वः पिबेदापो गायत्र्या श्राद्धभुक् द्विजः । ततः सन्ध्यामुपासीत होमं चैव यथाविधि ॥८४॥
The twice-born man who has partaken of the Śrāddha food should drink water ten times, consecrated with the Gāyatrī, and thereafter perform the Sandhyā worship and the Homa according to the prescribed procedure. ॥८४॥

चान्द्रायणं नवश्राद्ध पाराको (१) मासिके मतः । पक्षत्रयेऽति कृच्छ्र ं स्यात् षण्मासे कृच्छ्र एव तु ॥८५॥
The Cāndrāyaṇa is prescribed for the Nava-Śrāddha; the Parāka is prescribed for the monthly Śrāddha; for three fortnights, the Atikṛcchra is prescribed, and for six months, the Kṛcchra is prescribed. ॥८५॥

--- Page 9 ---


आब्दिके पादकृच्छ स्यादेकाहः पुनराब्दिके । अत ऊर्ध्वं न दोषः स्याच्छंखस्य वचनं यथा ॥८६॥
For the annual Śrāddha, a Pādakṛcchra is prescribed; for the subsequent annual Śrāddha, a one-day observance is prescribed. After that, there is no दोष, according to the statement of Śaṅkha. ॥८६॥

शस्त्रविप्रहतानां च शृंगीदंष्ट्रीसरीसृपैः । आत्मनस्त्यागिनां चैव निवर्तेतोदकक्रिया ॥८७॥
The water-offering rites should be discontinued for those who were killed by weapons, by horned or fanged animals, by reptiles, and for those who deliberately abandoned their own lives. ॥८७॥

गोविप्रनृपहन्तृणामन्वक्षं चात्मघातिनाम् । पाषण्डमाश्रितानां च निवर्ततोदकक्रिया ॥८८ ॥
The water-offering rites should also be discontinued for those who killed cows, Brāhmaṇas, or kings, for those who committed suicide, and for those who followed heretical doctrines. ॥८८॥

अग्निदाता तथा चान्ये ये चान्ये पाशछेदकाः । तप्तकृच्छ्रण शुध्यन्ति मनुराह प्रजापतिः ॥८६॥
Those who set the fire, and those who cut the bonds or ropes, are purified by the Taptakṛcchra; so declares Manu, the Prajāpati. ॥८६॥

गोभूहिरण्यहरणे स्त्रीणां क्षेत्रगृहेषु च । यमुद्दिश्य त्यजेत्प्राणांस्तमाह ब्रह्मघातकम् ॥९०॥
One who takes away cows, land, or gold, or violates women, fields, or houses, and because of whom someone abandons his life, is declared to be a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa. ॥९०॥

गोभिर्हतं ततो बद्ध ब्राह्मणेन तु घातितम् । तं स्पृशन्ति च विप्रा वोढारोऽग्निप्रदायकाः ॥९१॥
One who has been killed by cows, thereafter bound, or killed by a Brāhmaṇa—those who touch such a person, as well as those who carry him or provide the funeral fire, incur the prescribed impurity. ॥९१॥

उद्यता सह यावंत एककार्येष्ववस्थिताः । यद्य को घातयेत्तत्र सर्वे ते घातकाः स्मृताः ॥९२॥
However many people, having taken up weapons, are engaged together in a single undertaking, if one of them kills someone there, all of them are regarded as killers. ॥९२॥

बहूनां शस्त्रघातानामेकश्चेद्धर्मभेदनम् । सर्वे ते शुद्धिमिच्छन्ति स एको ब्रह्मघातकः ॥९३॥
If, among many who strike with weapons, one person alone causes the fatal breach, all of them may seek purification, but that one person alone is regarded as the slayer of a Brāhmaṇa. ॥९३॥

महापातकिसंस्पर्शे स्नानमेव विधीयते । संस्पृष्टस्तु तथा भुंक्त कृच्छ्रसांतपनं चरेत् ॥९४॥
For contact with one who has committed a Mahāpātaka, bathing alone is prescribed. One who has been touched by such a person and then eats should perform the Kṛcchra-Sāntapana. ॥९४॥

यस्य चाण्डालिसंयोगो भवेत् किञ्चिदकामतः । तत्र सान्तपनं कृत्त्वा प्राजापत्यद्वयं चरेत् ॥९५॥
If someone happens to have contact with a Caṇḍālī unintentionally, he should perform the Sāntapana and then undertake two Prājāpatya penances. ॥९५॥

कामतस्तु यदा कश्चिच्चण्डालीगमनं कृतम् । चान्द्रायणेन शुद्धिः स्यात्तप्तकृच्छ्रद्वयं चरेत् ॥९६॥
But if someone deliberately has intercourse with a Caṇḍālī, purification is obtained through the Cāndrāyaṇa, together with two Taptakṛcchra penances. ॥९६॥

--- Page 10 ---

चण्डालोदकसंस्पर्शे स्नात्त्वा विप्रो विशुध्यति । तेनैवोच्छिष्टसंस्पर्श त्रिरात्रेणैव शुध्यति ॥९७॥
If a Brāhmaṇa comes into contact with water touched by a Caṇḍāla, he becomes purified by bathing. By contact with the remnants of food touched by a Caṇḍāla, he is purified by observing a three-night penance. ॥९७॥

अज्ञानतः स्नानमात्रमन्येभ्योऽपि विशेषतः । अत ऊध्वं न दोषः स्यान्मदिरास्पर्शने तथा ।॥९८॥
If such contact occurs unknowingly, bathing alone is prescribed, and this is especially applicable in relation to others as well. From this point onward, there is likewise no further fault merely from touching liquor. ॥९८॥

अस्थिभेदं गवां कृत्त्वा लांगूलशफछेदनम् । पातनं चैव शृङ्गाणां मासार्धं यावकं पिवेन ॥९९॥
Having caused the breaking of a cow's bones, cutting of its tail or hooves, or the falling of its horns, one should drink a preparation of barley for half a month. ॥९९॥

यवसस्तावदृढव्यो यावद्रोहति तद्व्रणः । तद्वर्णा दक्षिणां दद्यात्ततः पापात्प्रमुच्यते ॥१००॥
Barley-grass should be given to it until its wound has healed; thereafter, one should give a gift of the prescribed value and thereby become freed from the sin. ॥१००॥

हले वा शकटे चैव दुर्बलं यो नियोजयेत् । प्रत्यवाये समुत्पन्ने ततः प्राप्नोति गोवधम ॥१०१॥
Whoever employs a weak or unfit cow in a plough or cart, if injury or harm results from it, incurs the sin of killing a cow. ॥१०१॥

प्रयत्नाद्वापि कृपेषु वृक्षच्छेद निपातने । गवाशनं कृन्तयित्त्वा ततः प्राप्नोति गोवधम् ॥१०२॥
If, through deliberate effort, one causes trees to be cut down or to fall into pits, or cuts away what a cow feeds upon, one thereby incurs the sin of killing a cow. ॥१०२॥

अतिवाहातिदोहाभ्यां नासिकाभेदनेन तु । नदीपर्वतसंरोधे पादोनं व्रतमाचरेन ॥१०३॥
For causing harm through excessive carrying, excessive milking, piercing of the nose, or obstructing a cow at a river or mountain, one should undertake a three-quarter portion of the prescribed penance. ॥१०३॥

एका चेद्रहुभिः कैश्चिदं वाद्वयापादिता यदि । पादं पादं च हत्यायाश्चरेयुक्ते पृथक पृथक ॥१०४॥
If a single cow is killed by several persons, each person should undertake a separate quarter portion of the penance prescribed for killing a cow. ॥१०४॥

एकपादं चरेद्रोधे हौ पादौ वन्धने चरेन । योजने च त्रयः पादाः चरेत्सर्व निपातने ॥१०५॥
For obstructing it, one should perform a quarter portion of the penance; for binding it, two quarters; for employing it, three quarters; and for causing its complete fall or death, the entire penance should be performed. ॥१०५॥

रोम्णां तु प्रथमे पादे द्वितीये श्मश्रुवापनम् । पादहीने शिखावर्ज सशिखं तु निपातने ॥१०६।।
For the first quarter, the hair should be shaved; for the second, the beard should be shaved. For a lesser portion, the head should be shaved leaving the śikhā; for the complete act, the śikhā too should be shaved. ॥१०६॥

पादे वस्त्रद्वयं दद्याद द्विपादे कांस्यभाजनम् । पादहीने च गां दद्यान्मिथुनं च निपातने ॥१०७।।
For one quarter, two garments should be given; for two quarters, a bronze vessel; for a lesser portion, a cow should be given; and for the complete act, a pair of cattle should be given. ॥१०७॥

--- Page 11 ---

कथंचिद् वृषभं हत्वा होमधेनु तथैव च । अन्नं तु द्विगुणं कुर्याद्दक्षिणा द्विगुणा भवेत् ॥१०८।।
If, in any manner, a bull or a sacrificial cow is killed, the prescribed food offering should be doubled, and the sacrificial fee should likewise be doubled. ॥१०८॥

राजा वा राजमान्यो वा ब्राह्मणो वा बहुश्रुतः । अकृत्वा वपनं तेषां प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् ॥१०९ ॥
If a king, one honoured as a king, or a highly learned Brāhmaṇa does not perform the prescribed shaving of the hair, what is the expiation for them? ॥१०९॥

केशानां रक्षणार्थाय द्विगुणं व्रतमाचरेत् । द्विगुणे तु व्रते चीर्णे द्विगुणा दक्षिणा भवेत् ॥११०।।
For the sake of preserving the hair, one should undertake the vow for twice the prescribed duration. When the vow is performed for twice the duration, the sacrificial fee should also be doubled. ॥११०॥

द्वौ मासौ पालयेद्वत्सं द्वौ मासौ द्वौ स्तनौ दुहेत् । द्वौ मासौ चैकवेलायां शेषं कालं यथेच्छया ।॥१११॥
For two months, the calf should be cared for; for the next two months, milk should be drawn from two teats; for another two months, it should be milked only once a day; and for the remaining period, as one wishes. ॥१११॥

औषधं पथ्यमाहारो दद्याद्‌गोब्राह्मणेषु च । वैकल्यतः (ल्पतः१) विपत्तौ च प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते ॥११२।।
Medicine and suitable nourishment should be provided to cows and Brāhmaṇas; in cases of disability or unavoidable misfortune, there is no prescribed expiation. ॥११२॥

निशिबन्धविरुद्ध षु व्याघ्रसर्पहतेषु च । अग्निविद्यन्निपातेषु प्रायश्चित्तं न विद्यते ॥११३॥
There is no expiation when [the animals] are killed at night while bound improperly, or are killed by a tiger or a serpent, or perish through fire, lightning, or a fall. ॥११३॥

स्नेहाद्वा यदि वा लोभाद्भयादज्ञानतोऽपि वा । वदन्त्यनुग्रहं ये वै तत्पापं तेषु गच्छति ॥११४।।
Whether out of affection, greed, fear, or even ignorance, those who grant such favour share in the sin resulting from it. ॥११४॥

बलत्वेन दशाहे तु प्रेतत्वं यदि गच्छति । सद्य एव तु शुद्धिः स्यान्न शौचं नैव सूतकम् ॥ ११५॥
If, because of infancy, one dies within ten days and becomes a departed spirit, purification takes place immediately; there is neither a period of mourning impurity nor a birth-related impurity. ॥११५॥

आदन्त जन्मनः सद्य आचूडान्नैशिकी स्मृता । आव्रतात्तु त्रिरात्रं स्याद्दशरात्रमतः परम् ॥११६।।
From birth until the eruption of the teeth, purification is immediate; from the tonsure ceremony until the initiation into the vow, the period is three nights; thereafter, it is ten nights. ॥११६॥

आचूडाकरणात सद्यः प्रदानान्नैशिकी स्मृता । आविवाहात्रिरात्रं स्याद्दशरात्रमतः परम् ॥११७॥
From birth until the tonsure ceremony, immediate purification is prescribed; from the giving away of the child until marriage, the period is three nights; thereafter, it is ten nights. ॥११७॥

अहस्त्त्वदत्तकन्यासु बालेषु च विशोधनम् । गुवन्ते वाभ्यनूचानमातुलश्रोत्रियेषु च ॥११८।।
Purification for girls who have not yet been given away, for children, and for those who are [under the care of] a guru, an Abhyanūcāna, a maternal uncle, or a Śrotriya, is [prescribed accordingly]. ॥११८॥

--- Page 12 ---

चतुर्थे दशरात्रं स्यात् षण्णिशाः पुंसि पञ्चमे । षष्ठे चतुरहं प्रोक्त सप्तमे तु दिनत्रयम् ॥११९॥
On the fourth day, ten nights of impurity are prescribed; on the fifth, six nights for a male; on the sixth, four days; and on the seventh, three days. ॥११९॥

एकाहाच्छुध्यते विप्रो योऽग्निवेदसमन्वितः । त्र्यहात् केवलवेदज्ञस्तद्धीनो दशभिर्दिनैः ॥१२०॥
A Brāhmaṇa who is learned in the Veda and maintains the sacred fires is purified after one day; one who knows only the Veda is purified after three days; and one lacking even that knowledge is purified after ten days. ॥१२०॥

मन्त्रकर्मपरिभ्रष्टाः संध्योपासनवर्जिताः । नामधारकविप्राणां भस्मांतं सूतकं भवेत् ॥१२१॥
For Brāhmaṇas who have abandoned the recitation of mantras and the prescribed rites, and who do not perform the Sandhyā worship, impurity continues until death; they are merely Brāhmaṇas in name. ॥१२१॥

संपर्काज्जायते दोषो नाऽन्यो दोषोऽस्ति ब्राह्मणे । तस्मात् सर्वप्रयत्नेन संपर्क नैव कारयेत् ॥१२२॥
For a Brāhmaṇa, impurity arises through contact; there is no other impurity of this kind. Therefore, one should avoid such contact by every possible effort. ॥१२२॥

आदावारभ्य आशौचं संयोगो यस्य नाग्निषु । आदावन्ते च विज्ञेयं यस्य वैतानि को विधिः ॥१२३॥
When impurity begins from the beginning and there is no connection with the sacred fires, it should be understood accordingly; where the Vaitānika rites are maintained, the impurity is determined from the beginning to the end according to their prescribed rule. ॥१२३॥

शवसूतकमुत्पन्नं पश्चाज्जातं न सूतकम् । शावेन शुध्यते सूतिः सूत्या शावं न शुध्यति ॥१२४॥
If impurity due to a death arises and a birth occurs afterward, the birth does not produce a separate period of impurity; the birth-related impurity is purified by the death-related impurity, but the death-related impurity is not purified by the birth-related impurity. ॥१२४॥

जातं जातेन शुद्ध स्यान्मृतकं मृतकेन तु । न जाते मृतशुद्धिः स्यान्न मृते जातकं तथा ॥१२५॥
A birth-related impurity is purified by another birth-related impurity, and a death-related impurity by another death-related impurity; a birth does not purify death-related impurity, nor does a death purify birth-related impurity. ॥१२५॥

मातुरग्रे प्रमीतिः स्यादशुद्धौ म्रियते पिता । पितुः शेषेण शुद्धिः स्यान्मातुः कुर्यात्तु पक्षिणीम् ॥१२६॥
If the father dies before the mother, and the mother dies while still in a state of impurity, purification is determined according to the remainder of the father's period; for the mother, a period of half a month should be observed. ॥१२६॥

स्रावे मातुस्त्रिरात्रं स्यात्सपिण्डाः शौचवर्जिताः । पाते मातुर्दशाहः स्यात्सपिण्डानां दिनत्रयम् ।।१२७।।
In the case of a miscarriage, the mother observes three nights of impurity, while the Sapindas observe no period of impurity; in the case of a later miscarriage, the mother observes ten days, while the Sapindas observe three days. ॥१२७॥

आचतुर्थाद्भवेत्सावः पातः पञ्चमषष्ठयोः । अत ऊर्ध्व प्रसूतिः स्यात् सूतकं तु यथोदितम् ॥१२८॥
Up to the fourth month, it is termed a miscarriage; in the fifth and sixth months it is called a falling of the fetus; after that, it is regarded as childbirth, and the period of birth-related impurity is observed as prescribed. ॥१२८॥

शिशोरभ्युक्षणं प्रोक्त बालत्याचमनं तथा । रजस्वलायाः संस्पर्श स्नानमेव कुमारके ॥१२९॥
For an infant, sprinkling with water is prescribed, and for a child, ritual sipping of water is likewise prescribed; upon touching a menstruating woman, a young boy should simply bathe. ॥१२९॥

--- Page 13 ---

आचूडाकरणाद्वाल आदन्ताच्च शिशुः स्मृतः । कुमारकस्तु विज्ञेयो यावन्मौञ्जीनिबन्धनात् ॥१३०॥
A child is regarded as a bāla until the Cūḍākaraṇa ceremony and as a śiśu from birth until the eruption of the teeth. A boy is called a kumāraka until the tying of the Muñjā grass girdle at initiation. ॥१३०॥

विवाहव्रतयज्ञेषु त्वन्तरामृतसूतके । पूर्वसंकल्पितार्थानि भोज्यानि मनुरब्रवीत् ॥१३१॥
If death or birth impurity occurs in the midst of a marriage, religious observance, or sacrifice, Manu declares that the food and other things already sanctioned by the prior solemn resolve may be used. ॥१३१॥

विवाहचौलोपनयने यस्य माता रजस्वला । तस्याः शुद्धः परं कार्य मांगल्यं मनुरब्रवीत् ॥१३२॥
If the mother of one for whom marriage, the Cūḍākaraṇa, or the Upanayana ceremony is being performed is menstruating, Manu declares that the auspicious rite should nevertheless be completed after observing the prescribed purification. ॥१३२॥

एकविंशत्यहर्यज्ञे विवाहे दश वासराः । पञ्चाश्चोपनयने नान्दीश्राद्ध' पुरो भवेत् ॥१३३॥
For a sacrifice lasting twenty-one days, ten days in the case of marriage, and five days in the case of the Upanayana, the Nandī Śrāddha should be performed beforehand. ॥१३३॥

विवाहव्रतयज्ञेषु अन्तरामृतसूतके । प्रारब्धे सूतकं न स्याद‌नारब्वे तु सूतकम् ॥१३४॥
If death or birth impurity occurs during a marriage, religious observance, or sacrifice, there is no Sūtaka if the rite has already begun; but if it has not yet begun, Sūtaka applies. ॥१३४॥

प्रारंभो वरणं यज्ञे संकल्पो व्रतसत्रयोः । विवाहे मातृपूर्व स्याच्छाद्ध पाकपरिक्रिया ॥१३५॥
In a sacrifice, the beginning is marked by the choosing of the officiating priest; in a vow or sacrificial session, by the solemn resolve; and in marriage, by the rites beginning with the mother and the preparation and circumambulation connected with the Śrāddha. ॥१३५॥

निमन्त्रिते यदा विप्रे श्राद्धकर्मण्युपस्थिते । विधिना चैव तत्कार्य नाशौचं नैव सूतकम ॥१३६॥
When a Brāhmaṇa who has been invited to perform a Śrāddha has arrived and the rite is undertaken according to the prescribed procedure, it should be completed, and neither Aśauca nor Sūtaka interrupts it. ॥१३६॥

भुजानेषु विप्रेषु सूतकं जायते यदि । अन्यगेहोदकाचान्ताः सर्वे ते शुद्धिमाप्नुयुः ॥१३७॥
If Sūtaka arises while the Brāhmaṇas are eating, they should go to another house, perform Ācamana with water there, and thereby all of them attain purification. ॥१३७॥

देशान्तरे मृतः कश्चिन सपिण्डः श्रूयते यदि । न त्रिरात्रमहोरात्रं सद्यः स्नात्वा विशुध्यति ॥१३८॥
If the death of a Sapinda in a distant country is heard of, one need not observe the three-night impurity; one becomes purified immediately after bathing, or after observing it for a single day and night. ॥१३८॥

देशान्तरं तु विज्ञेयं पष्ट्रियोजनमायतम् । चत्वारिंशद्वदन्त्यन्ये त्रिंशदन्ये विपश्चितः ॥१३९॥
A distant country is understood to mean a place six yojanas away; some learned authorities say it is forty yojanas, while others say thirty. ॥१३९॥

वाचो यत्र विभिद्यन्ते गिरिर्वा व्यवधायकः । महानद्यन्तरं यत्र तद्देशान्तरमुच्यते ॥१४०॥
A place where the language differs, or where a mountain stands as an intervening barrier, or where a great river lies between, is called a distant country. ॥१४०॥


--- Page 14 ---


स्वगोत्रो वान्यगोत्रो वा यदि स्त्री यदि वा पुमान् । प्रथमेऽहनि यो दद्यात् स दशाहं समापयेत् ॥१४१॥
Whether a woman or a man, of one's own lineage or of another lineage, if one offers the prescribed rites on the first day, the ten-day period of impurity shall be completed. १४१

निर्दशे गुरुपाते च कृते चैवोर्ध्वदेहिके । ऊर्ध्व त्रिरात्रमाशौचं दशाहमकृतक्रियः ॥१४२॥
When the ten-day period has passed and the funeral rites have been performed, three nights of impurity shall be observed thereafter; if the rites have not been performed, the impurity lasts for ten days. १४२

आत्रिमासात् त्रिरात्रं स्यात् षण्मासे पक्षिणी स्मृता । अहः संवत्सरार्वाक् ततः स्नानं समाचरेत् ।।१४३।।
Up to three months, three nights of impurity are prescribed; at six months, a fortnight is prescribed; before the completion of a year, one day is prescribed, after which one should perform a bath. १४३

रात्रावेव समुत्पन्ने मृते रजसि सूतके । पूर्वमेव दिनं ग्राह्यं यावन्नोद्यते रविः ॥१४४॥
If death, menstruation, or childbirth occurs during the night, the preceding day is to be counted until the sun rises. १४४

उदिते तु यदा सूर्ये नारीणां दृश्यते रजः । जननं वा विपत्तिर्वा यस्याहस्तस्य शर्वरी ॥१४५॥
When menstruation, childbirth, or death occurs after the sun has risen, that entire day is counted as the day on which the event occurred. १४५

उषसः प्राग्रजः स्त्रीणां विज्ञेयं दिनपूर्वकम् । अर्धरात्रावधिः कालः सूतकादौ विधीयते ॥१४६॥
If menstruation in women begins before dawn, it is to be regarded as having begun on the preceding day; in the case of impurity arising from birth and similar events, the period extending up to midnight is prescribed for determining the day. १४६

रात्रिं कृत्वा त्रिभागां तु द्वौ भागौ पूर्व एव तु । उत्तरं तु परं ज्ञेयं युज्यते रुधिरःस्मृतः ॥१४७॥
The night is divided into three parts, of which two belong to the preceding day; the remaining part is regarded as belonging to the following day, according to the prescribed reckoning of the menstrual flow. १४७

रजस्वला यदि स्नाता पुनरेव रजस्वला । एकादशदिनादर्वागशुचित्वं न विद्यते ॥१४८॥
If a menstruating woman bathes and menstruation begins again, there is no additional period of impurity before the completion of eleven days. १४८

रजस्वलायां प्रेतायां संस्कारादीनि नाचरेत् । ऊध्वं त्रिरात्रतः स्नातां शवधर्मेण दाहयेत् ॥१४९॥
When a menstruating woman dies, the funeral rites and related ceremonies should not be performed immediately; after three nights, once she has been bathed, she should be cremated according to the rites prescribed for the dead. १४९

या मृता सूतकी नारी या मृता च रजस्वला । पूर्ववस्त्रं परित्यज्य शवधर्मेण दाहयेत् ॥१५०॥
A woman who dies during the period of postpartum impurity, or while menstruating, should have her former garments removed and should be cremated according to the rites prescribed for the dead. १५०

अन्तरिक्षे मृता ये वाऽप्यग्नौ चाप्सु प्रमादतः । उदक्यां सूतिकीं नारीं चरेच्चान्द्रायणत्रयम् ॥१५१॥
For a woman who dies in the open air, or accidentally in fire or water, and for a menstruating or postpartum woman, the prescribed expiation is to undertake three Cāndrāyaṇa observances. १५१

--- Page 15 ---

स्नापयेत् पञ्चगव्येन मृत्तिकाभिश्च लेपयेत् । वंशपात्रेण तत्स्नानं ततः शुध्यति सूतिका ॥१५२॥
She should be bathed with pañcagavya and smeared with clay; after bathing her with a bamboo vessel, the woman in confinement becomes purified. ॥१५२॥

आतुरे स्नानमुत्पन्ने शतकृत्वा ह्यनातुरः । स्नात्वा स्नात्वा स्पृशेदेनं ततः शुध्यति आतुरः ॥१५३॥
When bathing is required for a sick person, a healthy person should bathe a hundred times and repeatedly touch the sick person; thus the sick person becomes purified. ॥१५३॥

शुना पुष्पवती स्पृष्ट्रा पुष्पवत्यन्यया तथा । शेषान्यहान्युपवसेत् घृतं प्राश्य विशुध्यति ॥१५४॥
If a menstruating woman is touched by a dog, or by another menstruating woman, she should fast for the remaining days and, after consuming ghee, becomes purified. ॥१५४॥

अन्त्यजैः स्वीकृते तीर्थे तडागेषु नदीषु च । पिवेत्पानीयमज्ञानात् पंचगव्येन शुध्यति ॥१५५॥
If, unknowingly, one drinks water from a sacred place, pond, or river that has been used by Antyajas, one becomes purified by consuming pañcagavya. ॥१५५॥

तडागकूपगर्ते तु चण्डालादिविदूषिते । अपां शतघटोद्धारः पंचगव्येन शुध्यति ॥१५६॥
If a pond, well, or pit has been polluted by a Caṇḍāla or others, drawing out a hundred pots of water and consuming pañcagavya effects purification. ॥१५६॥

दाराग्निहोत्रसंयोगं कुरुते योऽग्रजे स्थिते । परिवेत्ता स विज्ञेयः परिवित्तिस्तु पूर्वजः ॥१५७॥
When a younger brother establishes the household fire and enters into marriage while his elder brother is still present and has not done so, the younger is known as Parivettā, and the elder as Parivitti. ॥१५७॥

परिवित्तिः परिवेत्ता या या च परिविंदति । सर्वे ते नरकं यान्ति दातृयाजकपंचमाः ॥१५८॥
The Parivitti, the Parivettā, and the woman who causes this transgression all go to hell, together with the giver, the officiating priest, and the fifth party involved. ॥१५८॥

पितृव्यपुत्राः सापत्ना. परनारीसुताश्च ये । दाराग्निहोत्रधर्मेण न दोपः परिवेदने ॥१५९॥
The sons of paternal uncles, stepbrothers, and the sons of another woman are not subject to the fault of Parivedana in matters concerning marriage and the household fire. ॥१५९॥

ज्येष्ठो भ्राता यदातिष्ठेदाधानं नैव कारयेत् । अनुज्ञातस्तु कुर्वीत शंखस्य वचनं यथा ॥१६०॥
If the elder brother is still present, the younger should not establish the sacred fire; but if he has received permission from the elder, he may do so, according to the teaching of Śaṅkha. ॥१६०॥

आममांसं घृतं क्षौद्र' स्नेहाश्च पत्रसंभवाः । म्लेच्छभाण्डगता ये वे आत्मभाण्डगताः शुचिः ॥१६१॥
Raw meat, ghee, honey, and oils obtained from plants, whether kept in vessels belonging to Mlecchas or in one's own vessels, are considered pure. ॥१६१॥

पत्रचूर्णेषु यत्तोयं गोरसेषु च संस्थितम् । न दृष्यं तद्भवेद्वारि इत्येवं मनुरब्रवीत् ॥१६२॥
Water that has remained in powdered leaves and in substances derived from the cow is not considered impure; thus Manu has declared. ॥१६૨॥

--- Page 16 ---

संग्रामे अट्टमार्गे च यात्रादेवगृहेषु च । महोत्साहे महोत्पाते स्पृष्टास्पृष्टिर्न दुःष्यति ॥१६३॥
In battle, on public roads, during journeys, in temples, amid great festivals, and during great calamities, contact or non-contact does not cause impurity. ॥१६३॥

दिवा कपिच्छत्थछायायां रात्रौ दृद्धिशमीषु च । धात्रीफलेषु सप्तम्यामलक्ष्मीर्वसते सदा ॥१६४॥
During the day, Alakṣmī always dwells in the shade of the Kapiṭṭha tree; at night, among the Dṛddhi and Śamī trees, and in the fruits of the Dhātrī tree on the seventh day. ॥१६४॥

शूर्पवातो नखाद्विन्दुः केशवस्त्रघटोदकम् । मार्जनीरेणुसहितं हन्ति पुण्यं पुराकृतम् ॥१६५॥
The wind raised by a winnowing basket, a drop from the fingernail, hair, clothing, water from a vessel, and the dust raised by a broom destroy previously accumulated merit. ॥१६५॥

यत्र यत्र च संकीर्ण पश्येदात्मनमात्मना । तत्र तत्र तिलैहोमो गायत्र्या वर्तनं यथा ॥१६६॥
Wherever one perceives oneself to have become impure or contaminated, there one should perform a homa with sesame seeds and recite the Gāyatrī according to the prescribed procedure. ॥१६६॥

इदं दाल्भ्यकृतं शास्त्रं श्रावयिष्यति यो द्विजान् । सवपापविशुद्धात्मा पुण्यलोकमवाप्नुयात् ॥१६७॥
Whoever causes this scripture composed by Dālbhya to be heard by the twice-born shall, with the self purified of all sins, attain the world of merit. ॥१६७॥

इति श्रीदाल्भ्यप्रोक्त धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम् ॥
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra spoken by Śrī Dālbhya.


