--- Page 1 ---
ॐ तत्सद्ब्रह्मणे नमः
अथ देवलस्मृतिः श्रीगणेशाय नमः अथ प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Now begins the Devala Smṛti. Salutations to Śrī Gaṇeśa. Now begins the description of expiation.

सिन्धुतीरे सुखासीनं देवलं मुनिसत्तमम् समेत्य मुनयः सर्वे इदं वचनमब्रुवन् १
Having approached the excellent sage Devala, who was seated comfortably on the bank of the Sindhu, all the sages spoke these words. १

भगवन्म्लेच्छनीता हि कथं शुद्धिमवाप्नुयुः ब्राह्मणाः क्षत्त्रिया वैश्याः शूद्राश्चैवानुपूर्वशः २
O Bhagavan, how can Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras, who have been taken away by the Mlecchas, attain purification, each according to their respective order? २

कथं स्नानं कथं शौचं प्रायश्चित्तं कथं भवेत् किमाचारा भवेयुस्ते तदाचक्ष्व सविस्तरम् ३
How should they bathe, what should their purification rites be, and what expiation should they perform? What conduct should they follow? Please explain all this in detail. ३

देवल उवाच
Devala said:

त्रिशङ्कु वर्जयेद्देशं सर्वं द्वादशयोजनम् उत्तरेण महानद्या दक्षिणेन तु कीकटम् ४
One should avoid the entire region extending twelve yojanas around Triśaṅku, bounded by the great river to the north and Kīkaṭa to the south. ४

प्रायश्चित्तं प्रवक्ष्यामि विस्तरेण महर्षयः ५
O great sages, I shall explain the rules of expiation in detail. ५

मृतसूते तु दासीनां पत्नीनां चानुलोमिनाम् स्वामितुल्यं भवेच्छौचं मृते स्वामिनि यौनिकम् ६
In the case of the death or birth impurity of female servants and wives of Anuloma unions, the period of purification shall be the same as that of their master; upon the death of the master, the purification shall be as prescribed for his wife. ६

अपेयं येन संपीतमभक्ष्यं चापि भक्षितम् म्लेच्छैर्नीतेन विप्रेण अगम्यागमनं कृतम् ७
If one has drunk what should not be drunk, eaten what should not be eaten, or if a Brāhmaṇa who was taken away by the Mlecchas has had intercourse with an impermissible woman, ७

तस्य शुद्धिं प्रवक्ष्यामि यावदेकं तु वत्सरम् चान्द्रायणं तु विप्रस्य सपराकं प्रकीर्तितम् ८
I shall explain his purification. For a period of one year, the Cāndrāyaṇa and Parāka observances are prescribed for a Brāhmaṇa. ८

पराकमेकं क्षत्त्रस्य पादकृच्छ्रेण संयुतम् पराकार्धं तु वैश्यस्य शूद्रस्य दिनपञ्चकम् ९
For a Kṣatriya, one Parāka together with a Pādakṛcchra is prescribed; for a Vaiśya, half a Parāka; and for a Śūdra, five days. ९

नखलोमविहीनानां प्रायश्चित्तं प्रदापयेत् चतुर्णामपि वर्णानामन्यथाऽशुद्धिरस्ति हि १०
For those who have lost their nails and hair, the prescribed expiation should be performed; otherwise, there is impurity for all four varṇas. १०

प्रायश्चित्तविहीनं तु यदा तेषां कलेवरम् कर्तव्यस्तत्र संस्कारो मेखलादण्डवर्जितः ११
If their bodies have undergone the prescribed circumstances without the performance of expiation, their rites of purification should be performed, but without the girdle and staff. ११

म्लेच्छैर्नीतेन शूद्रैर्वा हारिते दण्डमेखले संस्कारप्रमुखं तस्य सर्वं कार्यं यथाविधि १२
For one whose staff and girdle have been taken away by Mlecchas or Śūdras, all the rites beginning with the purification ceremony should be performed according to the prescribed procedure. १२


--- Page 2 ---


संस्कारान्ते च विप्राणां दानं धेनुश्च दक्षिणा दातव्यं शुद्धमिच्छद्भिरश्वगोभूमिकाञ्चनम् १३
At the conclusion of the purification rites, Brāhmaṇas who desire purification should give gifts and a cow as sacrificial fee, together with a horse, a cow, land, and gold. १३

तदाऽसौ तु कुटम्बानां पङ्कि प्राप्नोति नान्यथा स्वभायां च यथान्यायं गच्छन्नेव विशुध्यति १४
Then he becomes eligible to sit in the dining row with his family; otherwise he does not. He is purified by approaching his own wife in accordance with the proper rule. १४

अथ संवत्सरादूर्ध्वं म्लेच्छैर्नीतो यदा भवेत् प्रायश्चित्ते तु संचीर्णे गङ्गास्त्रानेन शुध्यति १५
If, however, one has been taken away by the Mlecchas for more than a year, then, after completing the prescribed expiation, he becomes purified by bathing in the Ganges. १५

सिन्धुसौवीरसौराष्ट्र तथा प्रत्यन्तवासिनः कलिङ्गकौङ्कणान्वङ्गान्गत्वा संस्कारमर्हति १६
Those who have gone to Sindhu, Sauvīra, Saurāṣṭra, the frontier regions, Kaliṅga, Koṅkaṇa, or Vaṅga become eligible for the prescribed purification rites. १६

बलाद्दासीकृता ये च म्लेच्छचाण्डालदस्युभिः अशुभं कारिताः कर्म गवादिप्राणिहिंसनम् १७
Those who were forcibly made slaves by Mlecchas, Caṇḍālas, or robbers and were compelled to perform impure acts, such as killing cows and other living beings, १७

उच्छिष्टमार्जनं चैव तथा तस्यैव भोजनम् खरोष्ट्रविड्वराहाणामामिषस्य च भक्षणम् १८
as well as cleaning leftover food and eating that very food, and eating the flesh of donkeys, camels, boars, and pigs, १८

तत्स्त्रीणां च तथा सङ्गं ताभिश्च सह भोजनम् मासोषिते द्विजातौ तु प्राजापत्यं विशोधनम् १९
and having intercourse with their women and eating together with them—if a twice-born person has remained in such circumstances for a month, the Prājāpatya expiation is prescribed for purification. १९

चान्द्रायणं त्वाहिताग्नेः पराकस्त्वथ वा भवेत् चान्द्रायणं पराकं च चरेत्संवत्सरोषितः २०
For one who maintains the sacred fires, Cāndrāyaṇa or Parāka is prescribed; for one who has remained there for a year, both Cāndrāyaṇa and Parāka should be performed. २०

संवत्सरोषितः शूद्रो मासार्धं यावकं पिबेत् मासमात्रोषितः शूद्रः कृच्छ्रपादेन शुध्यति २१
A Śūdra who has remained there for a year should drink yāvaka for half a month; a Śūdra who has remained there for only a month becomes purified by performing a quarter of the Kṛcchra. २१

ऊर्ध्वं संवत्सरात्कल्प्यं प्रायश्चित्तं द्विजोत्तमैः संवत्सरैश्चतुर्भिश्च तद्भावमधिगच्छति २२
For periods exceeding a year, the excellent twice-born should determine the appropriate expiation; after four years, he attains that state of purification. २२

ह्रासो न विद्यते यस्य प्रायश्चित्तं दुरात्मनः गुह्यकक्षशिरोभ्रूणां कर्तव्यं केशवापनम् २३
For the wicked person whose expiation does not diminish, the hair of the private parts, armpits, head, and eyebrows should be shaved. २३

प्रायश्चित्तं समारभ्य प्रायश्चित्तं तु कारयेत् स्नानं त्रिकालं कुर्वीत धौतवासा जितेन्द्रियः २४
Having undertaken the expiation, he should perform the prescribed rites; he should bathe three times a day, wear washed garments, and keep his senses under control. २४

कुशहस्तः सत्यवक्ता देवलेन ह्युदाहृतम् वत्सरं वत्सरार्धं वा मासं मासार्धमेव वा २५
Holding kuśa grass in his hand and speaking the truth, he should observe the prescribed period—one year, half a year, a month, or half a month, as stated by Devala. २५

बलान्म्लेच्छैस्तु यो नीतस्तस्य शुद्धिस्तु कीदृशी संवत्सरोषिते शूद्रे शुद्धिश्चान्द्रायणेन तु २६
What is the purification of one who has been forcibly taken away by the Mlecchas? For a Śūdra who has remained there for a year, purification is attained through the Cāndrāyaṇa observance. २६


--- Page 3 ---


पराकं वत्सरार्धे च पराकार्धं त्रिमासिके मासिके पादकृच्छ्रश्च नखरोमविवर्जितः २७
A Parāka is prescribed for six months, half a Parāka for three months, and a quarter Kṛcchra for one month, with the nails and hair removed. २७

पादोनं क्षत्त्रियस्योक्तमर्धं वैश्यस्य दापयेत् प्रायश्चित्तं द्विजस्योक्तं पादं शूद्रस्य दापयेत् २८
For a Kṣatriya, three-quarters of the prescribed expiation should be performed; for a Vaiśya, half; and for a Śūdra, one-quarter of the expiation prescribed for a twice-born should be performed. २८

प्रायश्चित्तावसाने तु दोग्ध्री गौर्दक्षिणा मता तथाऽसौ तु कुटबान्ते ह्युपविष्टो न दुष्यति २९
At the completion of the expiation, a milch cow is prescribed as the sacrificial fee; thereafter, having sat at the end of the family dining row, he is no longer considered impure. २९

अशीतिर्यस्य वर्षाणि बालो वाऽप्यूनषोडशः प्रायश्चित्तार्धमर्हन्ति स्त्रियो रोगिण एव च ३०
Those who are eighty years old, children below sixteen, women, and the sick are entitled to perform only half of the prescribed expiation. ३०

ऊनैकादशवर्षस्य पञ्चवर्षात्परस्य च प्रायश्चित्तं चरेद्धाता पिता वाऽन्योऽपि वर्धिता ३१
For a child below eleven years but above five, the brother, father, or another responsible guardian should perform the expiation. ३१

स्वयं व्रतं चरेत्सर्वमन्यथा नैव शुध्यति तिलहोमं प्रकुर्वीत जपं कुर्यादतन्द्रितः ३२
Otherwise, the person should undertake the entire vow himself, for without this he is not purified. He should perform offerings of sesame into the fire and diligently undertake japa. ३२

संलापस्पर्शनिःश्वाससहयानासनाशनात् याजनाध्यापनाद्यौनात्पापं संक्रमते नृणाम् ३३
Sin is transmitted among people through conversation, physical contact, breath, riding together, sitting together, eating together, officiating at sacrifices, teaching, and sexual association. ३३

याजनं योनिसंबन्धं स्वाध्यायं सहभोजनम् कृत्वा सद्यः पतत्येव पतितेन न संशयः ३४
By officiating for a fallen person, having sexual relations with one, studying together, or eating together with one, a person immediately becomes fallen; of this there is no doubt. ३४

संवत्सरेण पतति पतितेन सहाऽऽचरन् याजनासनयज्ञादि कुर्वाणः सार्वकामिकम् ३५
One who associates with a fallen person for a year, performing such acts as officiating at sacrifices, sitting together, and conducting sacrificial rites for all purposes, himself becomes fallen. ३५

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि प्रायश्चित्तमिदं शुभम् स्त्रीणां म्लेच्छैश्च नीतानां बलात्संवेशने क्वचित् ३६
Henceforth I shall explain this auspicious expiation for women who have been taken away by Mlecchas and forcibly subjected to sexual intercourse. ३६

ब्राह्मणी क्षत्त्रिया वैश्या शूद्रा नीता यदाऽन्त्यजैः ब्राह्मण्याः कीदृशं न्याय्यं प्रायश्चित्तं विधीयते ३७
When a Brāhmaṇa woman, Kṣatriya woman, Vaiśya woman, or Śūdra woman has been taken away by Antyajas, what appropriate expiation is prescribed for a Brāhmaṇa woman? ३७

ब्राह्मणी भोजयेन्म्लेच्छमभक्ष्यं भक्षयेद्यदि पराकेण ततः शुद्धिः पादेनोत्तरतोत्तरान् ३८
If a Brāhmaṇa woman feeds a Mleccha or eats forbidden food, she is purified by a Parāka; for those of the succeeding varṇas, progressively smaller portions are prescribed. ३८

न कृतं मैथुनं ताभिरभक्ष्यं नैव भक्षितम् शुद्धिस्तदा त्रिरात्रेण म्लेच्छान्नेनैव भक्षिते ३९
If no sexual intercourse has taken place with them and no forbidden food has been eaten, they are purified by observing three nights; if Mleccha food alone has been eaten, the corresponding purification should be performed. ३९



--- Page 4 ---

रजस्वला यदा स्पृष्टा म्लेच्छेनान्येन वा पुनः त्रिरात्रमुषिता स्त्रात्वा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ४०
When a menstruating woman is touched by a Mleccha or by another person, she becomes purified after observing three nights, bathing, and consuming pañcagavya. ४०

स्पृष्ट्वा रजस्वलाऽन्योन्यं ब्राह्मणी क्षत्त्रिया तथा त्रिरात्रेण विशुद्धिः स्याद्देवलस्य वचो यथा ४१
When a menstruating Brāhmaṇa woman and a Kṣatriya woman touch one another, they are purified by observing three nights, according to the teaching of Devala. ४१

स्पृष्ट्वा रजस्वलाऽन्योन्यं ब्राह्मणी शूद्रजा तथा पञ्चरात्रं निराहारा पञ्चगव्येन शुध्यति ४२
When a menstruating Brāhmaṇa woman and a Śūdra woman touch one another, the Brāhmaṇa woman becomes purified by fasting for five nights and consuming pañcagavya. ४२

ब्राह्मण्यनशनं कुर्यात्क्षत्त्रिया स्त्रानमाचरेत् सचैलं वैश्यजातीनां नक्तं शूद्रे विनिर्दिशेत् ४३
The Brāhmaṇa woman should fast; the Kṣatriya woman should bathe with her clothes on; for a Vaiśya woman, bathing with her clothes on is prescribed; and for a Śūdra woman, eating only at night is prescribed. ४३

म्लेच्छान्नं म्लेच्छसंस्पर्शो म्लेच्छेन सह संस्थितिः वत्सरं वत्सरादूर्ध्वं त्रिरात्रेण विशुध्यति ४४
Eating Mleccha food, being touched by a Mleccha, or residing with a Mleccha for a year or longer is purified by observing three nights. ४४

म्लेच्छैर्हतानां चौरैर्वा कान्तारेषु प्रवासिनाम् भुक्त्वा भक्ष्यमभक्ष्यं वा क्षुधार्तेन भयेन वा ४५
For those who have been seized by Mlecchas or robbers, or who have lived in wilderness regions, and who, driven by hunger or fear, have eaten either permitted or forbidden food, ४५

पुनः प्राप्य स्वकं देशं चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य निष्कृतिः कृच्छ्रमेकं चरेद्विप्रस्तदर्धं क्षत्त्रियश्चरेत् पादोनं च चरेद्वैश्यः शूद्रः पादेन शुध्यति ४६
after returning to their own country, the expiation for the four varṇas is as follows: a Brāhmaṇa should perform one Kṛcchra, a Kṣatriya half of it, a Vaiśya three-quarters of it, and a Śūdra one-quarter of it to attain purification. ४६

गृहीता स्त्री बलादेव म्लेच्छैगुर्वीकृता यदि गुर्वी न शुद्धिमाप्नोति त्रिरात्रेणेतरा शुचिः ४७
If a woman has been forcibly taken and made pregnant by Mlecchas, if she is pregnant she does not attain purification; otherwise, she becomes pure by observing three nights. ४७

योषा गर्भ विधत्ते या म्लेच्छात्कामादकामतः ब्राह्मणी क्षत्त्रिया वैश्या शूद्रा वर्णेतरा च या ४८
A woman who bears a child by a Mleccha, whether willingly or unwillingly, whether she is a Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, Śūdra, or of another varṇa, ४८

अभक्ष्यभक्षणं कुर्यात्तस्याः शुद्धिः कथं भवेत् कृच्छ्र सांतपनं शुद्धिघृतैर्योनेश्च पाचनम् ४९
if she eats forbidden food, how shall her purification be accomplished? She should perform the Sāntapana Kṛcchra and undergo purification of the womb through clarified butter prescribed for purification. ४९

असवर्णेन यो गर्भः स्त्रीणां योनौ निषिच्यते अशुद्धा सा भवेन्नारी यावच्छल्यं न मुञ्चति ५०
When the seed of a person of another varṇa is deposited in a woman's womb, the woman remains impure as long as the foreign substance has not been expelled. ५०

विनिःसृते ततः शल्ये रजसो वाऽपि दर्शने तदा सा शुध्यते नारी विमलं काञ्चनं यथा ५१
When that substance has been expelled, or when menstruation appears, the woman becomes purified, like pure gold. ५१

स गर्भो दीयतेऽन्यस्मै स्वयं ग्राह्यो न कर्हिचित् स्वजातौ वजयेद्यस्मात्संकरः स्यादतोऽन्यथा ५२
That child should be given to another and should never be accepted as one's own; he should be given to another community, lest there be intermixture of varṇas. ५२

गृहीतो यो बलान्म्लेच्छैः पञ्च षट् सप्त वा समाः दशादि विंशतिं यावत्तस्य शुद्धिर्विधीयते ५३
For one who has been forcibly taken by Mlecchas for five, six, or seven years, or for any period from ten up to twenty years, the prescribed purification is to be performed. ५३

--- Page 5 ---

प्राजापत्यद्वयं तस्य शुद्धिरेषा विधीयते अतः परं नास्ति शुद्धिः कृच्छ्रमेव सहोषिते ५४
For one who has remained with the Mlecchas for such a period, two Prājāpatya observances are prescribed as purification; beyond this, there is no other purification, and a Kṛcchra should be performed for having lived with them. ५४

म्लेच्छैः सहोषितो यस्तु पञ्चप्रभृति विंशतिः वर्षाणि शुद्धिरेषोक्ता तस्य चान्द्रायणद्वयम् ५५
For one who has lived with the Mlecchas for a period beginning from five years and extending up to twenty years, the prescribed purification is two Cāndrāyaṇa observances. ५५

कक्षागुह्यशिरःश्मश्रुभूलोमपरिकृन्तनम् प्राहृत्य पाणिपादानां नखलोम ततः शुचिः ५६
The hair of the armpits, private parts, head, beard, and body should be cut; after removing the nails and hair of the hands and feet, one becomes purified. ५६

यो दातुं न विजानाति प्रायश्चित्तं द्विजोत्तमः शुद्धिं ददाति नान्यस्मै तदशुद्धेः स भोजनम् ५७
If an excellent twice-born person does not know how to prescribe the proper expiation, he should not grant purification to another; if he does so without proper knowledge, his food becomes impure. ५७

सभायां स्पर्शने चैव म्लेच्छेन सह संविशेत् कुर्यात्स्त्रानं सचैलं तु दिनमेकमभोजनम् ५८
If one sits together with a Mleccha in an assembly or comes into physical contact with one, he should bathe with his clothes on and observe a fast for one day. ५८

माता म्लेच्छत्वमागच्छेत्पितरो वा कथंचन असूतकं च नष्टस्य देवलस्य वचो यथा ५९
If the mother or father somehow becomes a Mleccha, there is no period of birth or death impurity for the person who has become separated from them, according to the teaching of Devala. ५९

मातरं च परित्यज्य पितरं च तथा सुतः ततः पितामहं चैव शेषपिण्डं तु निर्वपेत् ६०
The son should abandon both the mother and the father, and then the grandfather; thereafter, he should offer the remaining funeral oblation. ६०

स्त्रीणां चैव तु शूद्राणां पतितानां तथैव च पञ्चगव्यं न दातव्यं दातव्यं मन्त्रवर्जितम् ६१
Pañcagavya should not be given to women, Śūdras, or fallen persons with mantras; it should be given to them without mantras. ६१

वरुणो देवता मूत्रे गोमये हव्यवाहनः सोमः क्षीरे दग्नि वायुघृते रविरुदाहृतः ६२
Varuṇa is declared to be the deity of cow urine; the carrier of oblations, Agni, of cow dung; Soma, of milk; Vāyu, of curd; and the Sun, of ghee. ६२

गोमूत्रं ताम्रवर्णायाः श्वेतायाश्चैव गोमयम् पयः काञ्चनवर्णाया नीलायाश्चापि गोर्दधि ६३
Cow urine should be obtained from a copper-coloured cow, cow dung from a white cow, milk from a golden-coloured cow, and curd from a blue-coloured cow. ६३

घृतं वै कृष्णवर्णाया विभक्तिवर्णगोचरा उदकं सर्ववर्णं स्यात्कस्य वर्णो न गृह्यते ६४
Ghee should be obtained from a black cow; the respective substances are associated with cows of the prescribed colours, while water may be taken from a cow of any colour, for no particular colour is excluded. ६४

षण्मात्रिकं तु गोमूत्रं गोमयं च कुशोदकम् त्रिमात्रिकं घृतं क्षीरं दधि स्याद्दशमात्रिकम् ६५
Six measures of cow urine, cow dung, and kuśa-infused water are prescribed; three measures of ghee, and ten measures of milk and curd are prescribed. ६५

व्रते तु सर्ववर्णानां पञ्चगव्यं तु संख्यया प्रायश्चित्तं यथोक्तं तु दातव्यं ब्रह्मवादिभिः ६६
For persons of all varṇas undertaking a vow, pañcagavya should be given in the prescribed quantities; the expiation as stated should be prescribed by those learned in the Vedic teaching. ६६

अन्यथा दापयेद्यस्तु प्रायश्चित्ती भवेद्विजः ६७
A Brāhmaṇa who prescribes it otherwise himself becomes subject to expiation. ६७



--- Page 6 ---

कपिलायाश्च गोर्दुग्ध्वा धारोष्णं यः पयः पिबेत् एष व्यासकृतः कृच्छ्रः श्वपाकमपि शोधयेत् ६८
He who drinks the milk of a tawny cow, freshly milked and still warm, performs the Kṛcchra prescribed by Vyāsa, which purifies even a Śvapāka. ६८

तिलहोमं प्रकुर्वीत जपं कुर्यादतन्द्रितः विष्णो रराटमन्त्रेण प्रायश्चित्ती विशुध्यति ६९
One should perform a sesame oblation and diligently recite the mantra of Viṣṇu's forehead; by this, the person undertaking the expiation becomes purified. ६९

बहुनाऽत्र किमुक्तेन तिलहोमो विधीयते तिलान्दत्त्वा तिलान्भुक्त्वा कुर्वीताघनिवारणम् ७०
Why say much more about this? A sesame offering is prescribed; by giving sesame and consuming sesame, one should remove one's sins. ७०

संपादयन्ति यद्विप्राः स्त्रानं तीर्थफलं तपः संपादी क्रमते पापं तस्य संपद्यते फलम् ७१
Whatever the Brāhmaṇas accomplish through bathing, the merit of pilgrimage, and austerity, when it is properly accomplished, the sin is removed and its fruit is obtained. ७१

प्रायश्चित्तं समाख्यातं यथोक्तं देवलेन तु इतरेषामृषीणां च नान्यथा वाक्यमर्हथ ७२
The expiation has been declared as taught by Devala; the statements of the other ṛṣis should likewise not be disregarded. ७२

सुवर्णदानं गोदानं भूमिदानं गवाह्निकम् विप्रेभ्यः संप्रयच्छेत प्रायश्चित्ती विशुध्यति ७३
The person undertaking expiation should give gold, cows, land, and a cow for daily use to the Brāhmaṇas; thereby he becomes purified. ७३

पञ्चाहान्सहवासेन संभाषणसहाशनैः संप्राश्य पञ्चगव्यं तु दानं दत्त्वा विशुध्यति ७४
After living together for five days, conversing and eating together, one should consume Pañcagavya and give a donation; thereby one becomes purified. ७४

एकद्वित्रिचतुःसंख्यान्वत्सरान्संवसेद्यदि म्लेच्छवासं द्विजश्रेष्ठः क्रमतो द्रव्ययोगतः ७५
If a Brāhmaṇa lives among the Mlecchas for one, two, three, or four years, the prescribed purification is to be undertaken successively according to the means available. ७५

एकाहेन तु गोमूत्रं व्यहेनैव तु गोमयम् त्र्यहात्क्षीरेण संयुक्तं चतुर्थे दधिमिश्रितम् ७६
On the first day, Gomūtra is to be taken; on the second day, Gomaya; on the third day, it is combined with milk; and on the fourth day, it is mixed with curds. ७६

पञ्चमे घृतसंपूर्णं पञ्चगव्यं प्रदापयेत् पञ्चसप्तदशाहानि पञ्चदशाच्च विंशतिः ७७
On the fifth day, Pañcagavya complete with ghee should be administered; [the periods prescribed are] five, seven, ten, fifteen, and twenty days. ७७

संवासं च प्रवक्ष्यामि देहशुद्धिं द्विजन्मनाम् पञ्चाहं पञ्चगव्यं स्यात्पादकृच्छ्र दशाहिके ७८
I shall now describe the purification of the bodies of the twice-born after living in association [with the Mlecchas]: for five days, Pañcagavya is prescribed; for ten days, a Pādakṛcchra. ७८

पराकं पञ्चदशभिर्विंशेऽतिकृच्छ्रमेव च उदरं प्रविशेद्यस्य पञ्चगव्यं विधानतः ७९
For fifteen days, a Parāka is prescribed, and for twenty days, an Atikṛcchra; Pañcagavya should enter the stomach according to the prescribed procedure. ७९

यत्किंचिदुष्कृतं तस्य सर्वं नश्यति देहिनः पञ्च सप्ताष्ट दश वा द्वादशाहोऽपि विंशतिः म्लेच्छैर्नीतस्य विप्रस्य पञ्चगव्यं विशोधनम् ८०
Whatever sinful deed a person may have committed is all destroyed; for a Brāhmaṇa carried away by Mlecchas, Pañcagavya is prescribed as purification for five, seven, eight, ten, twelve, or even twenty days. ८०

पञ्चगव्यं च गोक्षीरं दधि मूत्रं घृतं पयः प्राश्यापरेऽह्नयुपवसेत्कृच्छ्रं सांतपनं चरेत् ८१
Having consumed Pañcagavya consisting of cow's milk, curds, urine, ghee, and milk, one should fast on the following day and perform the Sāntapana Kṛcchra. ८१


--- Page 7 ---

पृथक्सांतपनं द्रव्यैः षडहः सोपवासकः सप्ताहेन तु कृच्छ्रोऽयं महासांतपनः स्मृतम् ८२
The Sāntapana performed with the substances separately, over six days with fasting, is prescribed; when performed over seven days, this Kṛcchra is known as the Mahāsāntapana. ८२

पर्णोदुम्बरराजीवविल्वपत्रकुशोदकैः प्रत्येकं प्रत्यहं पीतैः पूर्णकृच्छ्र उदाहृतः ८३
Drinking each day, separately, the waters prepared from the leaves of Palāśa, Udumbara, the lotus, Bilva, and Kuśa is called the Pūrṇa Kṛcchra. ८३

तप्तक्षीरघृताम्बूनामेकैकं प्रत्यहं पिबेत् एकरात्रोपवासश्च तप्तकृच्छ्रस्तु पावनः ८४
One should drink, on successive days, each of hot milk, hot ghee, and hot water, followed by a one-night fast; this purifying observance is called the Tapta Kṛcchra. ८४

एकभक्तेन नक्तेन तथैवायाचितेन तु उपवासेन चैकेन पादकृच्छ्र उदाहृतः ८५
A Pādakṛcchra is prescribed as follows: eating only once during the day, eating only at night, eating food obtained without asking, and fasting for one day. ८५

कृच्छ्रातिकृच्छ्रः पयसा दिवसानेकविंशतिम् द्वादशाहोपवासेन पराकः परिकीर्तितः ८६
The Kṛcchra-Atikṛcchra consists of drinking only milk for twenty-one days; the Parāka is prescribed as a twelve-day fast. ८६

पिण्याकशाकतक्राम्बुसक्तूनां प्रतिवासरम् एकरात्रोपवासश्च कृच्छ्रः सौम्यः प्रकीर्तितः ८७
Taking, on successive days, oil-cake, vegetables, buttermilk, water, and roasted flour, followed by a one-night fast, is known as the Saumya Kṛcchra. ८७

एषां त्रिरात्रमभ्यासादेकैकस्य यथाक्रमम् तुलापुरुष इत्येष ज्ञेयः पञ्चदशाहिकः ८८
Practising each of these observances for three nights in succession, according to their order, is to be known as the Tulāpuruṣa, lasting fifteen days. ८८

तिथि वृद्धया चरेत्पिण्डाछुक्ले शिख्यण्डसंमितान् एकैकं ह्रासयेत्पिण्डान्कृच्छ्रचान्द्रायणं चरेत् ८९
According to the increase of the lunar dates, one should perform the observance by taking portions measured like peacock's eggs during the bright fortnight; thereafter, one should reduce the portions one by one and perform the Kṛcchra-Cāndrāyaṇa. ८९

यथाकथंचित्पिण्डानां चत्वारिंशच्छतद्वयम् इति देवल कृतं धर्मशास्त्रं प्रकीर्तितम् ९०
In whatever manner prescribed, the total number of portions is two hundred and forty. Thus the Dharmaśāstra composed by Devala has been proclaimed. ९०

समाप्तेयं देवलस्मृतिः

