अथ कश्यपस्मृतिः

प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Description of expiatory rites.

अथ काश्यपीयान् गृहस्थधर्मान् व्याख्यास्यामः
Now, we shall explain the duties of householders according to the Kāśyapīya tradition.

आहिताग्मिः स्वदारनिरतोऽचाग्नयग्निहोत्री स्त्रातामृतुकालगामी देवपितृमनुष्यभूतब्रह्मयज्ञानुसेवमानः एकद्वित्रिचतुर्णा ब्राह्मणान् कुर्वाणो व्रतनियमहोमजाप्यपरो मातृपितृभक्तो दारापत्यपोषकः शेषानुभोजी उपवासी त्रैवर्णिकमेदकसूतकान्नपरिहरमाणोऽलांगलवृत्तिः ।
A householder should maintain the sacred fires, remain devoted to his own wife, perform the Agnihotra, approach his wife during her proper season, and continually perform the five great sacrifices to the gods, ancestors, human beings, beings, and Brahman. He should employ one, two, three, or four Brāhmaṇas [as prescribed], be devoted to vows, observances, homa and japa, devoted to his mother and father, support his wife and children, partake only of the food remaining after others have been fed, observe fasting, avoid food rendered impure by the death or birth impurity of the three higher varṇas, and live by a non-ploughing occupation.

तत्र च भूम्यपोढने वृक्षच्छेदने नास्यधर्मोभवति ।
In this regard, his livelihood should not involve digging up the earth or cutting down trees.

कूपसेतुतडागविप्रदेवतायतनभेदने प्रायश्चित्तं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य चतस्रआहुतीर्जुहुयात् ।
If he destroys a well, bridge, reservoir, a Brāhmaṇa's property, or a temple of a deity, he should announce the prescribed expiation to the Brāhmaṇas and offer four oblations.

इदं विष्णुरिति प्रथमा मानस्तोक इति द्वितीया स्ववासा इति तृतीया दंष्ट्राभ्यामिति चतुर्थीरत्यस्त्रपोढयेत् तस्यैव देवतायै पूर्णाहुतिं जुहुयात् ।
The first [oblation] should be offered with “Idaṃ Viṣṇuḥ,” the second with “Mānastoka,” the third with “Svavāsā,” and the fourth with “Daṃṣṭrābhyām”; having thus removed the impurity, he should offer the pūrṇāhuti to that very deity.

अथ गोबलीवर्दमहिषधूर्याविकहिंसावाप्तौ प्रायश्चित्तकामकारतामित्येके ।
Now, in the case of killing a cow, bull, buffalo, a draught animal, or a sheep, some authorities prescribe an expiation according to one's capacity and desire to perform it.

दोग्धृदमनपर्यस्तपाषघट्टनघंटाभरणभूषणयोजन तैलमंडौषधभेषज्यत्रितयमाणे व्याप्तानामकामावाप्तयै प्रायश्चित्तंब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य सशिरक्षुरवपनं कृत्वा प्राजापत्यं कृच्छ्रमाचरेत् ।
In the case of accidental harm arising from milking, restraining, falling stones, striking, bells, ornaments, adornments, preparations involving oil, and the three kinds of medicines and remedies, the prescribed expiation should be announced to the Brāhmaṇas; then, after shaving the head completely with a razor, one should perform the Prājāpatya Kṛcchra.

चीणति गां दद्यात् ।
After completing it, he should give a cow.

तिलधेनुं जलधेनुं चेतिकाश्यपः ।
Kāśyapa further prescribes the gift of a sesame-cow or a water-cow.

अथ मृगमहिषगंडकवराहशरभऋक्षसिंहव्याघ्रमंडूकशूकर मत्स्यग्राह-शिशुमारादीनां वधेष्वहोरात्रं ।
Now, for the killing of a deer, buffalo, rhinoceros, boar, śarabha, bear, lion, tiger, frog, pig, fish, crocodile, śiśumāra, and similar creatures, the expiation is to be observed for one day and night.

चीणति गां दद्यात् ।
After completing it, he should give a cow.

मेष स त्रिरात्रं चीर्णान्ते हिरण्यं दद्यात् ।
For a sheep, it should be performed for three nights, and at its completion he should give gold.

अथ काक-वलाक-हंस-सारस-कारण्डव-चक्रवाक गृध्रश्येन-खंजरीट-टिट्टिभोलूक-शुक सारिकामयूरकाक-मद्र कलविंक-कपोत कपिंजलादीनां वधेष्वहोरात्रं चीर्णान्ते तिलान्दद्यात् ।
Now, for the killing of a crow, heron, swan, crane, kāraṇḍava, cakravāka, vulture, hawk, khañjarīṭa, lapwing, owl, parrot, sārikā, peacock, crow-madra, kalaviṅka, pigeon, kapinjala, and similar birds, the expiation is to be observed for one day and night; at its completion, sesame should be given.

अथातः श्व-जम्बूक-विडाल ऋषभरक्षुवासतोष्ट्र शूद्रवधे त्रिरात्रं च प्रायश्चित्तं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य प्राजापत्यं कृच्छ्रं चरेत् ।
Now, for the killing of a dog, jackal, cat, bull, bear, donkey, camel, or Śūdra, one should announce the expiation to the Brāhmaṇas and perform the Prājāpatya Kṛcchra for three nights.

चीर्णान्ते सव्रीहीन् दद्यात् ।
At its completion, he should give rice together with its husk.

कृकलास-सर्पनकुल-विडालगोजावधे त्रिरात्रं चीर्णान्ते लोहं दद्यात् ।
For the killing of a kṛkalāsa, serpent, mongoose, cat, or cow, the expiation is for three nights; at its completion, iron should be given.

येषां व्यापादने प्रायश्चित्तमुक्तं तेषामेवोच्छिष्टभोजने प्राणायामशतंकृत्वा घृतं प्राश्य शुद्धः स्यात् ।
For those beings whose killing has been prescribed an expiation, if one eats their leavings, he should perform one hundred prāṇāyāmas, consume clarified butter, and thereby become purified.

जातमृतकसूतके ब्राह्मणो दशरात्रेण क्षत्रियः पंचदशकेन वैश्योविंशतिरात्रेण शूद्रो मासेन शुद्धयति ।
In the impurity arising from birth or death, a Brāhmaṇa becomes purified after ten nights, a Kṣatriya after fifteen nights, a Vaiśya after twenty nights, and a Śūdra after one month.

तच्चेदंतः पुरवापतंति तत्समेन शुध्यावस्वहः ।
If this impurity occurs within the specified period, purification is attained after an equal number of days.

अब्राह्मणो न जायते नाधीयीत नाध्यापयेत् न दद्यात् न प्रतिगृह्णीयात् ।
A non-Brāhmaṇa should not be born [into the sacred status], should not study the Veda, should not teach it, should not give [Vedic instruction], nor should he accept it.

अशुचिर्द्विपदे चतुष्पदे नादितदहः ।
He remains impure with respect to two-footed and four-footed beings until that day has passed.

अथानशनमृतानामशनिहतानां वा अग्निप्रविष्टानां भृगुपतनसंग्रामदेशां-तरमृतानां वा गर्भविनिःसृतानां त्रिरात्रेण शुद्धिरुच्यते ।
Now, those who die through fasting, those struck by lightning, those who enter fire, those who die by falling from a height, those who die in battle, those who die in a foreign land, and those who die after emerging from the womb are said to become purified after three nights.

अथ लशुन-पलांडगृञ्जन कुंभीकुक्कुटभक्षणे सुरासीधुमधुमद्यपाने अयाज्ययाजने पतितसावित्र्युपनयने तैः प्रायश्चित्तं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य यत्र ग्राममृगाणां पशूनां शब्दो न श्रूयते तस्मिन्प्रदेशे अग्निं प्रणिपरिसमुह्य पर्युपरिस्सर्य सशिखवपनं कृत्वा प्राक् प्रणीतेन विधिना पुनः संस्कार-मर्हन्तीति ।
Now, in the case of eating garlic, onion, gṛñjana, kumbhī, or cock; drinking surā, sīdhu, honey-wine, or intoxicating liquor; officiating at a sacrifice for one who is unfit to perform it; and performing the upanayana of one who has fallen from the Sāvitrī, one should announce the prescribed expiation to the Brāhmaṇas. In a place where the sounds of village animals and beasts are not heard, one should establish and surround the fire according to the prescribed procedure, shave the head leaving the śikhā, and then perform the re-sanctification according to the previously prescribed method.


अथ पञ्चमहापातकाः प्रवक्ष्यन्ते
Now, the five great sins shall be explained.

ब्राह्मणो नैव हन्तव्यः स्वस्वप्रक्षेपया द्विजैः सुवर्णहरणं चैव कर्तव्यं न कथंचन १
A Brāhmaṇa must never be killed by a twice-born person under any circumstances, and the stealing of gold must never be committed. १

सुरुपत्नीं न गच्छेत संस्पर्शश्च न तैश्चरेत् महापातकसंज्ञेया निर्दिष्टानां मनीषिभिः २
One must not approach another man's wife, nor engage in sexual contact with her; these acts have been designated by the wise as great sins. २

वत्सरत्रितयं कुर्यात् नरः कृच्छ्रं विशुद्धये आत्मतुल्यसुवर्णं च दद्याद्वाविप्रतुष्टिकृत् ३
A man should perform the Kṛcchra penance for three years for purification, and should give gold equal in weight to himself, thereby satisfying the Brāhmaṇas. ३

आत्रेयीगर्भ राजन्यवैश्यौ यज्ञगतौ हत्वा एतदेवकुर्यात् ।
If one kills a Kṣatriya or Vaiśya who is engaged in a sacrifice, or kills one in the womb of an Ātreyī, he should perform this very same expiation.

अथाकालिव्याख्यास्यन्नाह
Now, while explaining the expiations for untimely and unusual occurrences, he says:

अविनिरटकविद्य तवज्ज्रनिर्घातप्रपतने भूमिचलने चैवाथनिम्नोत्तरे चैव प्रायश्चित्तं ब्राह्मणेभ्योनिवेद्य समीमयीनां समिध मधुदधिघृताक्तानामष्ट-साहस्रं जुहुयात् । शन्नोदेवीति काश्यपः ।
In the event of [inauspicious occurrences such as] abnormal phenomena, thunderbolt strikes, falling from a height, earthquakes, or unusual rising and sinking of the ground, one should announce the prescribed expiation to the Brāhmaṇas and offer eight thousand oblations of Śamī-wood sticks anointed with honey, curd, and ghee. Kāśyapa prescribes the mantra “Śaṃ no devī.”

यत्र वेश्मनि उलूकोनिपतति । गृहं गोधाकपोतः प्रविशति ।
Where an owl falls into a house, or where a lizard or pigeon enters the house,

कृष्टः शकुनिः श्येनो वा रथभुज्येवानिपतति । वल्मीक दीपिकागृहे पुरो ददति ।
where a śakuni or hawk falls upon a ploughed field or chariot, or where an anthill or a dīpikā is found within a house,

श्रृगापुरोहणे कपाटघंटापुरोहणे चैव प्रायश्चित्तं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य शमीमयीनां समिधदधिमधुघृताक्तानामष्टसहस्रं जुहुयात् वास्तोस्पते इति काश्यपः ।
and in the case of the rising of a horn or the rising of a door-bell, one should announce the prescribed expiation to the Brāhmaṇas and offer eight thousand oblations of Śamī-wood sticks anointed with curd, honey, and ghee, reciting “Vāstoṣpate,” according to Kāśyapa.

अथ नैमित्तिकानि व्याख्यास्यामः
Now, we shall explain the occasional rites of expiation.

क्षीरभाण्डभेदने मंथने भंजने पुरोहललांगल गलचक्रतूपपतने रथविपर्य्यासने अश्वभंजने रजस्वला-शवस्पर्शने आदित्यास्तमने संद-मंदेदुःस्वप्नदर्शन कर्णकेशपतिपुरोहणे यूपस्थलस्पर्शन मृतकसूतक भोजने चैव ब्राह्मणेभ्यो निवेद्य सचैले कृत्वा स्वप्रतिरथं जपेदिति काश्यपः ।
In the event of breaking a vessel containing milk, churning, breaking, the falling of a plough, ploughshare, yoke, wheel, or sacrificial post, the overturning of a chariot, the injury of a horse, touching a menstruating woman or a corpse, an unusual setting of the sun, the seeing of ominous or evil dreams, the falling of hair from the ear, the falling of a husband, touching the place of a sacrificial post, or eating food rendered impure by death or birth impurity, one should announce the prescribed expiation to the Brāhmaṇas, remain clothed, and recite the prescribed mantra for one's own purification, says Kāśyapa.

अथातः पात्राणां शौचविधि व्याख्यास्यामः
Now, we shall explain the rules for purification of vessels.

पलेखने न दारुपत्रे भस्मनांकांस्यं शीश्रुतास्त्रायसानां सिकताभिः शौचं ।
Wooden vessels and leaves are purified by scraping; bronze and similar vessels are purified with ashes; iron vessels are purified with sand.

दंतशंखमणिराजतसौवर्णानां घर्षणं ।
Ivory, conch, jewels, silver, and gold are purified by rubbing or polishing.

मृण्मयानां पुनर्दहनं ।
Clay vessels are purified by firing them again.

धान्यवाससां वहूनां प्रोक्षणं काष्ठ रजुत्वक्चर्म चीर वेणु विदलपत्रपर्णानां चलवच्छौचम् ।
Grain and large quantities of cloth are purified by sprinkling; wood, rope, bark, leather, cloth strips, bamboo, split leaves, and foliage are purified by washing or cleansing in the prescribed manner.

अथ पूर्व पापकर्मणां चिह्न व्याख्यास्यामः
Now, we shall explain the signs by which previous sinful actions are recognized.

अगम्यागामी दुश्चर्मा तस्मात्प्रायश्चित्तं वेदात्मविशुद्धये ।
One who approaches a forbidden woman, or one afflicted with bad skin, should undertake expiation for purification of the self according to the Veda.

एतान् श्राद्धेपरिवर्जयेत् ये चान्ये पंक्तिदूषकाः ।
Such persons, as well as others who defile the ritual dining row, should be excluded from a Śrāddha.

चट्टघटा चा घटानटा प्रवजितरंगारतानिदेवलकनक्षत्रजीवकग्रामयाजकपर्य्याहित-पर्याधारकविविंदकपौनर्भवानाश्नंति ।
[Persons such as] Caṭṭa, Ghaṭa, Ca Ghaṭanaṭa, wandering performers, those devoted to acting, temple priests, astrologers who make their livelihood from the stars, village priests, those who officiate for others, those who support themselves by such occupations, Vivindakas, and those born from remarriage should not be fed [at the Śrāddha].

अदन्तादेके नाश्नंति ।
Some who have no teeth should not be fed.

भार्याजितस्य नगरग्रामयाजकेभ्यः अविश्रस्तघाती व्यंगोनक्षत्र सूचकाः ।
Those who are dominated by their wives, village or town priests, untrustworthy killers, the physically deformed, and those who make their livelihood by astrological prognostication [are to be excluded].

वर्जनीयाद्विजाह्येते श्राद्धकर्मसु नित्यशः दाराधीनाः क्रियाः सर्वा दाराः स्वर्गस्य साधनं ४
These twice-born persons should always be avoided in Śrāddha rites. All religious acts are dependent upon the wife, and wives are the means of attaining heaven. ४

इत्येतत्ब्रह्मणाप्रोक्तं काश्यपस्यानुशासनम् सप्त पौनर्भवा कन्या वर्जनीया कुलाधमाः ५
Thus was this teaching of Kāśyapa proclaimed by Brahmā. Seven kinds of daughters born from remarriage are to be avoided, for they are considered the lowest of their lineage. ५

वाचा दत्ता मनोदत्ता कृतमंगलकौतुका उदकस्पर्शका याच याच पाणिग्रहीतिका ६
They are: one given away merely by spoken promise, one given away by mental resolve, one for whom the auspicious marriage rites have been performed, one for whom the ritual sprinkling of water has been performed, and one whose hand has been formally taken in marriage. ६

अग्मयुपायं गता या च पुनर्वाह्यस्य वादिका इत्येताः कश्यपप्रोक्ता दहेयुः कुलमग्निवत् ७
And one who has approached a man before the proper marriage, as well as one who has been remarried, are included among these. Kāśyapa declares that such women consume their lineage like fire. ७

प्ररोहत्यग्निमादाय पादपानां कुलंमहत् न हि पुनर्भवादीनां कुलं तस्य प्ररोहति ८
When fire is taken, a great mass of trees can grow again [after being burned]; but the lineage of those born from remarriage and similar unions does not flourish again. ८

पिता वा यदि वा भ्राता माता वा यदिवेतरः नरश्च कृतपापानां गति यां याति तां शृणु ९
Whether it is the father, brother, mother, or another person, hear now the destination to which a person who commits such sins goes. ९

मनिवर्ती यथा श्येनो गच्छत्येव यमालयं एवं च नरकं याति कन्या अमृतकारका १०
Just as a hawk that does not turn back proceeds directly to the abode of Yama, so too does the girl who causes such consequences go to hell. १०

पुनः सम्पद्यते नारी गतमात्मानमात्मनि अस्थिमात्रं त्वचं भित्वा शुक्रं तेजोबलं तथा ११
The woman is again united with the self that has departed into herself, [and through this union] bone, skin, semen, vitality, and strength are produced. ११

शुद्धिं न ये प्रयच्छंति दुहितरं लोभमोहिताः तेषां तु नरके घोरे याति वै सप्तमं कुलम् १२
Those who, deluded by greed, do not properly give their daughter in marriage and thereby purify her, cause the seventh generation of their lineage to descend into a terrible hell. १२

गमनागमनायोगात् एवं शुक्रे विधीयते एवं ज्ञात्वा युक्तकन्यां विंदेत स तत्कुलात् १३
Thus, because of the union and intercourse through which semen is produced, this rule is prescribed. Knowing this, one should seek a suitable maiden from a worthy family. १३

नस्यादैवे च पित्र्ये च दासीस्यादथ संचिता क्रयक्रीता तु सा दासी न सा पत्नी विधीयते १४
A woman who is acquired for service, whether for divine or ancestral purposes, is a servant; and one who has been bought and sold is likewise a servant, and is not regarded as a wife. १४

अमिष्टोमातिरात्राणां शतं शतगुणी कृतम् प्राप्नोति पुरुषोदत्वा होममंत्रै रलंकृताम् १५
A man who gives [in marriage] a maiden adorned with the prescribed marriage rites and accompanied by the appropriate homa mantras obtains the merit of one hundred Aṃiṣṭomas and one hundred Atirātras multiplied a hundredfold. १५

यस्तु सात्यमधर्मेण पिता समर्पयेत् सुताम् स प्रेत्य लभते स्थानं यथा दक्ष प्रजापतिः १६
But a father who, acting according to truth and righteousness, gives his daughter in marriage obtains after death a place like that of Dakṣa Prajāpati. १६

इति काश्यप प्रणीतं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम्
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra composed by Kāśyapa.
