--- Page 1 ---
॥ श्रीगणेशाय नमः ॥

* नारायणस्मृतिः *
  प्रथमोऽध्यायः
  नारायणदुर्वाससोः सम्बादः

एकदा नैमिषारण्ये ब्रह्मर्षिगणसेविते । नारायणो महायोगी दूर्वाससमपृच्छत ॥१॥
Once, in the Naimiṣāraṇya forest, frequented by groups of Brahmarṣis, the great Yogin Nārāyaṇa asked Durvāsas. ॥१॥

भगवन् मुनिशार्दूल सर्वधर्मभृतांवर । काले कलियुगे पुण्यधर्मे लुप्ते भुवस्स्थले ॥२॥
O Bhagavān, O foremost among sages, O best of those who uphold all dharmas, when the age of Kali arrives and meritorious dharma disappears from the earth. ॥२॥

सर्वपापप्रशमनी प्रायश्चित्तविधिः कथम् । पापाः कतिविधाः प्रोक्ता विस्तरेण वदस्व मे ॥ ३ ॥
What is the prescribed method of expiation that destroys all sins? How many kinds of sins have been described? Tell me about them in detail. ॥ ३ ॥

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

नारायण महायोगिन् शृणु विस्तरतो मम । कृते युगे चतुष्पादो धर्मो बद्धति वद्धति (ते) ।। ४ ॥
O Nārāyaṇa, great Yogin, listen to my explanation in detail. In the Kṛta Yuga, Dharma stands firmly upon all four feet and flourishes. ॥ ४ ॥

त्रेतायुगे तु सम्प्राप्ते पादहीनो भवेद्वषः । द्वापरे समनुप्राप्ते द्विपादाभ्यां वृषस्स्थितः ॥५॥
When the Tretā Yuga arrives, Dharma loses one foot. When the Dvāpara Yuga arrives, the bull of Dharma stands upon two feet. ॥५॥

ततः कलियुगे प्राप्ते पादेनैकेन तिष्ठति । ततः कृतो युगःश्रेष्ठो मध्यमस्तदनन्तरम् ॥६॥
Then, when the Kali Yuga arrives, Dharma stands upon only one foot. Therefore, the Kṛta Yuga is the highest, and the Tretā Yuga is next in order. ॥६॥


--- Page 2 ---


अधमो द्वापरयुगः कलिस्स्यादधमाधमः । कृते कृते युगे पापे तद्देशं संपरित्यजेत् ॥७॥
The Dvāpara Yuga is inferior, and the Kali Yuga is the most inferior of all. In the Kṛta Yuga, when a sin is committed, one should abandon that particular region. ॥७॥

त्रेतायां ग्राममात्रं तु द्वापरे कुलमुसृजेत् । कलौ युगे विशेषेण कर्त्तारं तु परित्यजेत् ॥८॥
In the Tretā Yuga, one should abandon merely the village; in the Dvāpara Yuga, one should leave one's family; but in the Kali Yuga, especially, one should renounce the person who committed the sin. ॥८॥

कृतत्रेताद्वापरे (बु) तु मरणान्तादिनिष्कृतिः । कलौ युगे तु सम्प्राप्ते मरणान्ता न निष्कृतिः ॥ ९ ॥
In the Kṛta, Tretā, and Dvāpara Yugas, expiation extends even to the time of death; but when the Kali Yuga arrives, there is no expiation that continues until death. ॥ ९ ॥

पापा नवविधाः प्रोक्ताः सावधानतया शृणु । ब्रह्महत्या सुरापानं स्तेयं गुर्वङ्गनागमः ॥१०॥
Nine kinds of sins have been described; listen attentively. They are the killing of a Brāhmaṇa, drinking intoxicating liquor, theft, and sexual intercourse with the wife of one's teacher. ॥१०॥

य एतै (स्सह) संयोगी महापातकिनस्त्विमे । अतिदेशादमीषां यदातिदेशिकमुच्यते ॥११॥
Those who are associated with these sins are called Mahāpātakins, or perpetrators of great sins. By extension, sins similar to these are called Atideśika sins. ॥११॥

एतत्प्रकाशपापानां रहस्यानां तथैव च । गोवधादिकमेनोयदुपातकमुच्यते ।।१२।।
Among sins that are openly known as well as those committed secretly, acts such as killing a cow are called Upapātakas, or subsidiary sins. ॥१२॥

यज्जातं तिलधान्यादि विक्रयात्पापमात्मनः । सङ्करीकरणं प्राहुः कन्यापहरणादिकम् ॥१३॥
The sin arising from the sale of sesame, grain, and similar commodities is described as Saṅkarīkaraṇa; acts such as abducting a maiden are included under it. ॥१३॥

मलिनीकरणं चैव चण्डालीगमनादिकम् । अपात्रीकरणं प्राहुः दुरन्नादेस्तु भोजनम् ॥१४॥
Acts such as intercourse with a Caṇḍālī are called Malinīkaraṇa, while eating improper or forbidden food is called Apātrīkaraṇa. ॥१४॥

जातिभ्रं शकरं प्राहुस्तथा दुर्मरणादिकम् । प्रकीर्णकमिति प्रोक्तं पापानि नवधा क्रमात् ॥१५॥
Sins such as those involving the loss or corruption of caste are called Jātibhraṃśakara; those such as an improper or untimely death belong to another category. The sins are thus said to be of nine kinds, in this order, with miscellaneous sins called Prakīrṇaka. ॥१५॥

महतां पातकानान्तु प्रायश्चित्तं कलौ युगे। द्वचयुतैरेव गोदानैर्मत्या विप्रवधे कृते ॥१६॥
In the Kali Yuga, for the great sins, expiation is prescribed. For the intentional killing of a Brāhmaṇa, it is prescribed through the gift of two hundred thousand cows. ॥१६॥

अमत्यायुतगोदानैर्निष्कृतिः परिकीर्तिता । सुरापानं द्विजः कृत्वा ब्रह्महत्याव्रतं चरेत् ॥१७॥
For unintentional killing, expiation is prescribed through the gift of one hundred thousand cows. A twice-born who has committed the sin of drinking liquor should undertake the penance prescribed for the killing of a Brāhmaṇa. ॥१७॥

--- Page 3 ---

म्वर्णस्तेयेऽपि तद्वत्स्यान्मातृगन्तुस्तथैव च । अभ्यासे द्विगुणादीनि कल्पनीयानि सत्तम ॥१८॥
The same expiation is prescribed for the theft of gold and likewise for intercourse with one's mother; O noble one, when such sins are repeatedly committed, the penances should be increased twofold and so forth. ॥१८॥

गोवधे च कृते विप्रैरमत्या तु पराककम् । मत्या चान्द्रायणं कार्य नान्यथा मुच्यते त्वघान् ॥१९॥
If a Brāhmaṇa unintentionally kills a cow, he should perform the Parāka penance; if he does so intentionally, he should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. Otherwise, he cannot be freed from the sin. ॥१९॥

तिलविक्रयणे चान्द्र तप्त ं तण्डुलविक्रये । निक्षेपहरणे विप्रश्चान्द्रायणमथाचरेन ॥२० ॥
For selling sesame, the Cāndrāyaṇa penance is prescribed; for selling rice, the Tapta Kṛcchra is prescribed. A Brāhmaṇa who takes away a deposit should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance. ॥२०॥

चण्डालीगमने विप्रम्त्वज्ञानान्मासमात्रतः । सेतुम्नानं ततः कृत्वा शुद्धिमाप्नोत्यसंशयः ॥२१॥
A Brāhmaṇa who unknowingly has intercourse with a Caṇḍālī should observe the prescribed penance for one month and thereafter bathe at Setubandha; undoubtedly, he thereby attains purification. ॥२१॥

मत्या द्विमासमभ्यासे वत्सरं सेतुमज्जनम् । व्यतिपातादिदुष्टान्न भोजने न कृते यदि ॥२२॥
If it is done intentionally, the penance should be observed for two months, followed by bathing at Setubandha for one year. If one has eaten food rendered impure by Vyatipāta and similar circumstances, ॥२२॥

प्राजापत्यद्वयं कृत्वा शुद्धिमाप्नोत्यसंशयः । विद्युदग्न्यादिभिर्विश्रो मत्या प्राणैर्वियुज्यते ॥२३॥
one should perform two Prājāpatya penances and thereby undoubtedly attain purification. If a Brāhmaṇa intentionally loses his life through lightning, fire, or similar causes, ॥२३॥

तत्पापस्य विशुद्धयर्थ तत्पुत्रादिर्यथाविधि । मत्या त्वशीतिकृच्छ्राणि कृत्वा संस्कारमाचरेत् ॥२४॥
for the purification from that sin, his son or another appropriate relative should perform the prescribed rites. If it was intentional, eighty Kṛcchra penances should be performed as the expiation. ॥२४॥

अमत्या दशकृच्छ्राणीत्येवमाहुर्महर्षयः । तुलाप्रतिग्रहे लक्षगायत्रीजपमाचरेत् ॥२५॥
The great sages declare that ten Kṛcchra penances should be performed when it was unintentional. For accepting a Tula gift, one should perform one hundred thousand recitations of the Gāyatrī. ॥२५॥

हिरण्यगर्भग्रहणे त्वष्टलक्षं जपेद्बुधः । प्रतिग्रहे कल्पतरोरष्टलक्षजपं चरेत् ॥२६॥
For accepting a Hiraṇyagarbha gift, the wise person should perform eight hundred thousand recitations. For accepting a Kalpataru gift, one should perform eight hundred thousand recitations. ॥२६॥

गवां चैव सहस्र तु प्रतिगृह्य द्विजाधमः । नवलक्षं जपं देव्याः प्रातस्स्नात्वा समाचरेत् ॥२७॥
A twice-born who accepts a thousand cows as a gift should bathe in the morning and perform nine hundred thousand recitations of the Devī's mantra. ॥२७॥

हिरण्यकामधेनुं तु प्रतिगृह्य द्विजाधमः । अष्टलक्षं जपेहवीं तत्पापम्यापनुत्तये ।।२८।।
A twice-born who accepts a golden Kāmadhenu should perform eight hundred thousand recitations for the removal of that sin. ॥२८॥

--- Page 4 ---

हिरण्याश्वस्य च तथा ग्रहणे भूसुराधमः । अष्टलक्षजपं कृत्वा शुद्धिमाप्नोति पूर्वजः ॥२९॥
And likewise, upon accepting a golden horse, the lowliest of Brāhmaṇas attains purification by performing eight hundred thousand repetitions of the mantra. ॥२९॥

हिरण्याश्वरथं गृह्य वसुलक्षजपं चरेत् । हेमस्तम्बेरमं गृह्य वसुलक्षजपाच्छुचिः ॥३०॥
Upon accepting a golden horse-drawn chariot, he should perform eight hundred thousand repetitions; upon accepting a golden elephant, he becomes purified by performing eight hundred thousand repetitions. ॥३०॥

हेमहस्तिरथस्यैव ग्रहणे मुनिनन्दन । कूष्माण्डलक्षहोमेन शुद्धोभवति पूर्ववत् ॥३१।।
O delight of the sages, upon accepting a golden elephant-drawn chariot, he becomes purified, as before, by performing a homa with one hundred thousand Kūṣmāṇḍa offerings. ॥३१॥

पञ्चलाङ्गलदानस्य ग्रहणे विप्रनन्दनः । दशलक्षजपाद्देव्याः सम्यगेव समाचरेत् ।।३२।।
O delight of the Brāhmaṇas, upon accepting the gift of the five-plough measure, he should properly perform ten hundred thousand repetitions of the Devī mantra. ॥३२॥

प्रतिगृह्य धरादानं दशलक्षजपं चरेत् । विश्वचक्रस्य ग्रहणे तत्पापप्रशमाय च ।।३३।।
Upon accepting the gift of land, he should perform ten hundred thousand repetitions; and upon accepting the Viśvacakra, he should do the same for the destruction of that sin. ॥३३॥

प्रयुतेनाभिषेकेण शम्भोश्शुद्धिमवाप्नुयात् । लतायाः कल्पसंज्ञायाः ग्रहणे विप्रनन्दन ॥३४॥
He should attain purification through one hundred thousand ablutions of Śambhu. O delight of the Brāhmaṇas, upon accepting the gift known as Kalpalatā, ॥३४॥

लक्षद्वादशवारं तु गायत्री जपमाचरेत् । सप्तसागरसंज्ञस्य दानस्यैव प्रतिग्रहे ॥३५॥
he should perform twelve hundred thousand repetitions of the Gāyatrī; upon accepting the gift known as the Seven Seas, ॥३५॥

देव्या द्वादशलक्षं तु जपं विप्रस्समाचरेत् । प्रतिग्रहे चर्मधेनोस्तत्पापम्य विशुद्धये ।।३६।।
the Brāhmaṇa should perform twelve hundred thousand repetitions of the Devī mantra for purification from the sin incurred by accepting a leather cow. ॥३६॥

देवीद्वादशलक्षं तु जपं विप्रम्समाचरेत् । महाभूतघटस्यैव ग्रहणे विप्रनन्दन ॥३७॥
O delight of the Brāhmaṇas, upon accepting the Mahābhūta vessel, the Brāhmaṇa should perform twelve hundred thousand repetitions of the Devī mantra. ॥३७॥

लक्षमात्रं जपेहें वीं तम्मात्पापात्प्रमुच्यते । एवमादिमहापापान्यनेकानि च सन्ति हि ॥३८॥
He should perform one hundred thousand repetitions and thereby become freed from that sin. Thus, there are many such great sins of this kind. ॥३८॥

यो विप्रो धनलोभेन प्रतिगृह्णात्ति कामतः । नरके नियतं वासः कल्पान्नं परिकीर्तितः ॥३९॥
That Brāhmaṇa who knowingly accepts gifts out of greed for wealth is destined to dwell in hell; such a condition is said to endure for a kalpa. ॥३९॥

वधपानापहरणगमनाद्यश्च विक्रयात् । हरणाद्भोजनात्सङ्गात् ग्रहणात्सहसङ्गतः ॥४०॥
From killing, drinking, stealing, illicit intercourse and selling; from taking what is not given, eating prohibited things, association with sinners, accepting gifts and keeping such company, ॥४०॥

पापान्यनेकान्युच्यन्ते तत्र तत्र महर्षिभिः । निष्कृतिश्चापि कथिता द्रष्टव्या विप्रनन्दन ॥४१॥
many sins are declared by the great sages in their respective teachings, and their means of expiation have also been prescribed. O delight of the Brāhmaṇas, they should be examined accordingly. ॥४१॥

वच्मि ते परमं गुह्य किमन्यच्छ्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥
I shall tell you the supreme secret. What else do you wish to hear?

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ पापविवरणं नाम प्रथमोऽध्यायः ।।
Thus ends the first chapter, entitled “Description of Sins,” in the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti.

--- Page 5 ---


अथ द्वितीयोऽध्यायः
The Second Chapter

बुद्धिकृताभ्यासकृतपापानांप्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Description of the Expiations for Sins Committed Intentionally and Through Repeated Practice

नारायणउवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

भगवन्मुनिनाथ त्वं मयि वात्सल्यगौरवात् । पुनवस्व गुह्य मे शरणं प्रणतोऽस्म्यहम् ॥१॥
O Bhagavān, Lord of sages, out of your affection and regard for me, reveal to me once again this secret; I bow down and take refuge in you. ॥१॥

मत्यामत्या तथा पापात् अत्यन्ताभ्यासतस्तथा । बहुकालाभ्यासतश्च यत्पापं मनुजैः कृतम् ॥ २॥
Whatever sins human beings have committed intentionally or unintentionally, through constant repetition, or through practice continued for a long period, ॥२॥

तत्तत्कालानुगुण्येन प्रायश्चित्तं वदस्व मे ॥
tell me the appropriate expiation for each of these according to the circumstances and duration. ॥

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

नारायण महायोगिन् प्रायश्चित्तं यदीरितम् । तद्बुद्धिकृते पापे द्विगुणं बुद्धिपूर्वतः ॥३॥
O Nārāyaṇa, great Yogin, whatever expiation has been prescribed for a sin, it should be doubled when the sin is committed intentionally and with deliberate awareness. ॥३॥

अभ्यासे त्रिगुणं चैवमत्यन्ताभ्यासतस्तथा । चतुर्गुणं बहोः कालात् षडगुणं परिकीर्तितम् ॥ ४ ॥
For a sin committed repeatedly, it should likewise be threefold; through very frequent repetition, fourfold; and when practiced over a long period, it is prescribed as sixfold. ॥ ४ ॥

वर्षादूर्ध्वपापापनुतयेप्रायश्चित्ताकरणे न निष्कृतिः एतद्वर्षात्पुराज्ञेयं वर्षादूध्वं न निष्कृतिः ॥ ५ ॥
If expiation is not performed within a year for the removal of a sin, there is no further means of atonement. This should be understood as the rule applying before the completion of one year; after one year, there is no expiation. ॥ ५ ॥

तस्मात्पापं न कर्तव्यं नरैर्नरकभीरुभिः । वर्षात्परं तुः सामान्यपापाभ्यासात्पतत्यसौ ।॥ ६ ॥
Therefore, people who fear hell should not commit sins. After a year, a person falls through the continued practice of ordinary sins. ॥ ६ ॥

तस्मात् त्रिवर्षपर्यन्तं द्विगुणत्रिगुणादिकम् । कल्पनीयं प्रयत्नेन प्रायश्चित्तं मनीषिभिः ॥ ७ ॥
Therefore, for up to three years, the wise should carefully prescribe expiation in double, triple, and progressively increased measure. ॥ ७ ॥

ततः परन्तु तद्भावमधिगच्छत्यसंशयः ।
After that, without doubt, one comes to attain that condition. ॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनं नाम द्वितीयोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the second chapter, entitled “Description of Expiations,” in the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti.

--- Page 6 ---

अथ तृतीयोऽध्यायः
The Third Chapter

नानाविधदुस्कृतिनिस्तारोपायवर्णनम्
Description of the Means of Deliverance from Various Kinds of Misdeeds

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

दुर्मांसभक्षणेनैव दुस्संसर्गविशेषतः । दुष्कृत्यशतसाहस्रात् दुराचारसहस्रतः ॥१॥
Through the eating of forbidden meat, especially through evil association, through hundreds of thousands of sinful deeds, and through thousands of acts of misconduct, ॥१॥

अत्यन्तमलिने काये बहुकालं गतेऽपि च नानाबन्धुविनिन्दाभिस्त्यागादात्मजनैरपि ॥२॥
even when the body has become exceedingly impure, when a long period has passed, and when, because of various accusations and condemnations, one has been abandoned even by one's own relatives, ॥२॥

परैरपि च संत्यागात् धनहान्या विशेषतः । अतिनिर्वेद‌द्मापन्नः काले बहुदिने गते ॥३॥
and when one has also been abandoned by others, especially after suffering loss of wealth, having become deeply afflicted with remorse and after much time has passed, ॥३॥

प्रपन्नश्शरणं कश्चित् कथं निष्कृतिरीरिता ।
if such a person seeks refuge, what means of expiation has been prescribed?

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

वास्तवाद्वाऽवास्तवाद्वा यः पुमान् शरणं व्रजेत् ।। ४ ।।
Whether in truth or merely outwardly, whoever seeks refuge, ॥ ४ ॥

--- Page 7 ---


तं त्यजेच्छक्तिमान्सोऽयमाब्रह्म नरके वसेत् । शरणागतसंत्राणमवश्यं कार्यमेव हि ॥५॥
If a person is capable of doing so, he should not abandon one who has sought refuge; otherwise, he would remain in hell until the end of the cosmic age. Protecting one who has sought refuge must certainly be done. ॥५॥

यावत्त्रिवर्ष पतितोऽप्यात्मभावं न मुञ्चति । अभ्यासस्यानुसारेण कल्प्यं निष्क्रयणं भवेत् ॥ ६॥
For up to three years, even if he has fallen into sin, as long as he has not abandoned his sense of self and repentance, the expiation should be determined according to the extent of his repeated misconduct. ॥ ६॥

आत्मभावविहीनस्स्यादतः परमनातुरः । चतुर्थवर्षपर्यन्तं कथंचित्पूर्वनिष्कृतिः ॥ ७ ॥
If he becomes devoid of that sense of repentance, then, from that point onward, he is considered exceedingly difficult to remedy. Up to the fourth year, however, the previously prescribed expiation may in some manner be undertaken. ॥ ७ ॥

ततः परं न कर्मार्हः कृतनिष्क्रयणोऽप्ययम् । तथाऽपि पापबाहुल्यात् नालं पूर्वोक्तनिष्कृतिः ॥ ८ ॥
After that, even if he has performed the prescribed expiation, he is no longer fit for the ritual acts. Nevertheless, because of the abundance of his sins, the previously mentioned expiation is not sufficient. ॥ ८ ॥

द्वितीयाब्दं समारभ्य सप्तमाव्दावधि द्विजः । प्राजापत्यद्वयं तस्य नित्यं स्याद्दिनसंख्यया ॥ ९ ॥
From the beginning of the second year up to the seventh year, a twice-born should perform two Prājāpatya penances daily, according to the number of days. ॥ ९ ॥

सौदर्शिनीं तु संस्थाप्य कलशद्विशतेन तु । कूष्माण्डशतहोमेन गणहोमशनेन च ।।१०।।
Having established the Sau-darśinī rite with two hundred pots, he should perform a hundred Kūṣmāṇḍa oblations and the prescribed Gaṇa homa. ॥१०॥

पाहित्रयोदशानां च होमानां शतसंख्यया । तथैव विरजाहोमशतेन जुहुयाच्छुचिः ॥११॥
He should perform one hundred homas of the thirteen Pāhitra rites, and likewise one hundred Virajā homas, thereby becoming purified. ॥११॥

भूगोगर्भविधानेन पटगर्भविधानतः । स्वयं पितावाथान्यो वा जातकर्मादि भावयेत् ।।१२।।
According to the Bhūgarbha procedure and the Paṭagarbha procedure, the father himself, or another qualified person, should perform the rites beginning with Jātakarma. ॥१२॥

प्राच्योदीच्यांगसहितं प्रायश्चित्तमिदं चरेत् । नान्यथा शुद्धिमाप्नोति यथा भुवि सुरराघटः ॥१३॥
He should perform this expiation together with the rites prescribed for the eastern and northern traditions. Otherwise, he does not attain purification, just as an impure vessel on the earth cannot become purified otherwise. ॥१३॥

एवमेव नवाब्दान्तं प्रायश्चित्तविनिर्णयः । दशमाब्दं समारभ्य याद्विशतिवर्षकम् ॥१४॥
Thus, this is the determination of expiation up to the end of the ninth year. From the beginning of the tenth year up to the twentieth year, ॥१४॥

अघमर्षणसाहस्र रब्लिङ्गशतमज्जनैः । सहस्रकलशस्नानैः गायत्र्या प्रणवेन च ।।१५।।
one should perform one thousand recitations of the Aghamarṣaṇa, one hundred ablutions of the Liṅga, one thousand ritual baths with pots of sanctified water, together with recitation of the Gāyatrī and Praṇava. ॥१५॥

ततः पूर्वोक्तहोमैश्च प्राच्योदीच्याङ्गसंयुतां । पूर्ववन्निष्कृतिं कृत्वा पञ्चगव्यं विशेषतः ॥१६॥
Thereafter, having performed the previously mentioned homas together with the rites of the eastern and northern traditions, he should perform the expiation as before, particularly with Pañcagavya. ॥१६॥

दशदानं भूरिदानं सहस्रब्रह्मभोजनम् । ततो गङ्गाजले स्नानं सेतुदर्शनमेव वा ।।१७॥
He should make the ten prescribed gifts, abundant gifts, and feed one thousand Brāhmaṇas. Thereafter, he should bathe in the waters of the Gaṅgā or behold Setubandha. ॥१७॥

एवं कृते विशुद्धोऽभूत् पूर्ववद्विजनन्दनः । स्वकर्मपरकर्मार्हो भवेदेव न संशयः ॥१८॥
Having done this, O delight of the twice-born, he becomes purified as before. Without doubt, he becomes fit for performing his own duties and the duties of others. ॥१८॥

विशतेर्वर्षतः पश्चात् आर्को वाऽनार्त्त एव वा । नात्यन्तमलिनस्याहुः प्राजापत्यं महर्षयः ॥१९॥
After twenty years, the great sages prescribe a Prājāpatya penance for one who is not exceedingly impure, whether he is afflicted or otherwise. ॥१९॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ नानाप्रायश्चित्तवर्णननाम तृतीयोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the third chapter, entitled “Description of Various Expiations,” in the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti.

--- Page 8 ---

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः
The Fourth Chapter

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

योगिनांवर मत्स्वामिन् सर्वज्ञ करुणानिधे । वदस्व तपतां श्रेष्ठ मयि वात्सल्यगौरवात् ॥ १ ॥
O foremost among Yogins, my Lord, omniscient one, treasure of compassion, O best among ascetics, out of your affection and regard for me, tell me. ॥ १ ॥

विंशतिवर्षतः पश्चात् अतीवार्तस्समागतः । निष्कृतिन कथं तस्य स्यादित्येवं ब्रवीषि मे ॥ २॥
You have said that after twenty years, one who comes afflicted with great distress has no expiation. Tell me, how can there be no means of purification for such a person? ॥ २ ॥

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

कोपसंरक्तनयनः कुटिलभ्र लतायुतः । स्फुरदोष्ठद्वयोऽतीव विष्फुलिङ्गितलोचनः ॥ ३॥
With his eyes reddened by anger, his eyebrows drawn into a crooked frown, his lips trembling, and his eyes flashing fiercely, ॥ ३ ॥

नारायणमिदं प्राहः वाचातिक्ररया भृशम् । किमरे मूढ दुष्टात्मन् उपर्युपरिपृच्छसि ॥४॥
he spoke these harsh words to Nārāyaṇa: “Why, O fool, wicked-minded one, do you keep asking again and again?” ॥४ ॥

परिहासो भवेर्तिकवा न सहे कोपमुल्बणम् । पुनरेवं न प्रष्टव्यं यदि पृच्छसि दुर्मते ॥ ५ ॥
“Do not take this as a joke; I cannot tolerate such intense anger. Do not ask such a question again, O wicked-minded one, if you question me once more.” ॥ ५ ॥

--- Page 9 ---

मत्कोपजातकालाग्नौ मूर्द्धा ते व्यपतिष्यति । इति ब्रुवन्तं कोपेन दुर्वाससमनन्यधीः ॥ ६॥
“Your head will fall into the fire of destruction born from my anger.” Thus, when Durvāsas spoke in anger, Nārāyaṇa, whose mind was entirely focused upon him, ॥ ६॥

उत्प्रवेपितसर्वाङ्गो भयविह्वललोचनः । पपात पा‌योस्तस्य शस्त्रच्छिन्न इव द्रुमः ॥ ७॥
with his whole body trembling and his eyes overwhelmed with fear, fell at his feet like a tree cut down by a weapon. ॥ ७॥

ततः करुणया दृष्ट्या दुर्वासास्तु महामुनिः । पाणिभ्यां तं समुद्धृत्य ममार्ज मुखमञ्जसा ॥८॥
Then the great sage Durvāsas, looking upon him with compassion, lifted him up with both hands and gently wiped his face. ॥८॥

ततो धैर्य समालम्ब्य नारायणमुनौ स्थिते । प्रीत्योवाच स तुष्टात्मा नारायणमहामुनिम् ॥९॥
Then, when the sage Nārāyaṇa had regained his composure, Durvāsas, whose mind was pleased, spoke affectionately to the great sage Nārāyaṇa. ॥९॥

तात वत्स न भेतव्यं प्रसन्नोऽस्मि तवानघ । कुटिलं पृच्छमानं त्वां मत्त्वा कोपो महानभूत् ॥१०॥
“My dear child, do not be afraid. O sinless one, I am pleased with you. Thinking that you were asking your question with an improper intention, I became greatly angered.” ॥१०॥

त्वदुक्ति संपरिज्ञाय मम चित्तं सुनिर्मलम् । सञ्जातमिहनिश्शंकं पृच्छ मां यद्यदिच्छसि ॥११॥
“Having understood the meaning of your words, my mind has now become completely clear and free from doubt. Ask me without hesitation whatever you wish to know.” ॥११॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनं नाम चतुर्थोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the fourth chapter, entitled “Description of Expiations,” in the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti.

--- Page 10 ---

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्यायः
The Fifth Chapter

दुष्प्रतिग्रहादिप्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
Description of the Expiations for Improper Acceptance of Gifts and Other Sins

नारायणः उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

भगवन्मुनिशार्दूल नमस्ते रुद्रमूर्त्तये । कालाग्निसदृशप्रख्य कोपनाय नमोनमः ॥ १ ॥
O Bhagavān, foremost of sages, salutations to you, whose form is Rudra; salutations again and again to you, whose anger is terrible like the fire of cosmic destruction. ॥ १ ॥

प्रसीद मे महर्षे त्वं पाहि मां शरणागतं । न कौटिल्यादहं पृच्छे नाहङ्कारान्महामुने ॥२॥
Be gracious to me, O great sage, and protect me, who have sought refuge in you. I am not asking out of deceit, nor out of pride, O great sage. ॥२॥

हिताय सर्वलोकानां पृष्टवानस्मि साम्प्रतम् । प्रसन्नो यदि वात्सल्यात् प्रष्टव्यं किंचिदस्ति मे ॥ ३ ॥
I have asked this now for the welfare of all people. If you are pleased with me out of affection, there is something I wish to ask you. ॥ ३ ॥

कोपो न स्याद्यदि पुनः मामनुज्ञापय प्रभो ।
If you will not become angry again, O Lord, kindly permit me to ask.

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

तात मां पितरं विद्धि गुरुमाचार्यमेव वा ॥४॥
My dear child, regard me as your father, or as your guru and teacher. ॥४॥

मम कोपः प्रशमितः तव वास्तवदर्शनात् । अतस्त्वं भयमुत्सृज्य पृच्छ मां यद्यदिच्छसि ॥ ५ ॥
My anger has been pacified by recognizing the sincerity of your intention. Therefore, cast aside your fear and ask me whatever you wish. ॥ ५ ॥

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

पृच्छन्तं मामतीवात्तं उत्तरं दातुमर्हसि । सर्वपापप्रशमनं सर्वसिद्धिकरं नृणाम् ॥ ६ ॥
I ask you this question with great earnestness; you ought to give me an answer. Tell me of that which removes all sins and brings about every accomplishment for human beings. ॥ ६ ॥

चिराभ्यस्तमहापापदूषितानां दुरात्मनाम् । दुर्देशगमनेनैव दुष्प्रतिग्रहकोटिभिः ।। ७।।
For those wicked persons who have been polluted by the long practice of great sins, through going to improper or forbidden places, and through millions of improper acceptances of gifts, ॥ ७ ॥

म्लेच्छान्त्यश्वपचस्त्रीभिः संसर्गाच्चिरकालतः । अपेयमद्यपानाद्य दुष्टमांसादिभक्षणैः ॥ ८ ॥
through long association with Mlecchas, Antyajas, Śvapacas, and women, and through drinking forbidden intoxicating beverages and eating impure meat and other such foods, ॥ ८ ॥

--- Page 11 ---

आर्त्तानां का गतिर्ब्रह्मन् वदस्व करुणानिधे ।
O Brahman, treasure of compassion, tell me what becomes of those who are afflicted.

दुर्वासाः उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

शृणुष्व सारः पृष्ठोऽद्य लोकानां हितकाम्यया ॥ ९॥
Listen, for today I shall tell you the essence of what has been asked, with the welfare of the people in mind. ॥ ९॥

संग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्येऽद्य सावधानतया शृणु । युगेष्वपि च सर्वेषु सत्त्वराजसतामसाः ॥१०॥
Today I shall explain it briefly; listen attentively. In all the ages, the three qualities—sattva, rajas, and tamas—॥१०॥

नित्यं गुणाः प्रवद्धन्ते तत्प्रभाधं वदामि ते । सत्त्वप्रवत्तका भूयः प्रवद्ध न्ति (न्ते) कृते युगे ॥११॥
continually increase and prevail according to their influence. I shall explain their effects to you. In the Kṛta Yuga, those inclined toward sattva become predominant. ॥११॥

सात्त्विकानान्तु वक्ष्यामि गुणानां कृत्यमद्भुतम् । स्त्रीपुंसंयोगमात्रेण स्त्रियां गर्भः प्रजायते ॥१२॥
Now I shall explain the wondrous workings of the qualities among those who are sāttvika. Through the union of woman and man alone, conception takes place in the woman. ॥१२॥

तस्मिन्निविशते जीवः कर्मपाशवशंगतः । तस्य प्रवेशकालस्तु सात्त्विको यदि वै भवेत् ॥१३॥
The individual soul, bound by the bonds of karma, enters that embryo. If the time of its entry is sāttvika, ॥१३॥

जातमात्रस्य तस्यैव सात्त्विकत्वं भवेद्भवम् । ततः कतिपये काले बुद्धिस्सत्त्वे प्रवर्त्तते ॥१४॥
then, from the very time of birth, that being becomes sāttvika. After some time, his intellect becomes directed toward sattva. ॥१४॥

सत्त्वप्रवर्त्तनात्सोऽयं सत्कृत्यमनुतिष्ठति । स्नानं सन्ध्या जपोहोमः स्वाध्यायः पितृतर्पणम् ॥१५॥
As sattva becomes predominant in him, he performs virtuous acts: bathing, Sandhyā worship, recitation of mantras, homa, study of sacred texts, and offerings to the ancestors. ॥१५॥

अतिथ्याराधनादीनि प्रवृध्यन्ति (प्रवर्धन्ते) हि नित्यशः । नैव पापसमाचारे प्रवृत्तिस्स्यात्कदाचन ॥१६॥
Acts such as honoring guests continually increase in him. He never develops an inclination toward sinful conduct. ॥१६॥

कालधर्म गते तस्मिन मुक्त श्वयं भवेद्ध्वम् । तस्य प्रवेशकालस्तु राजमो यदि वै भवेत् ॥१७॥
When his allotted time comes to an end, he himself becomes liberated. But if the time of his entry into the embryo is dominated by rajas, ॥१७॥

रजोगुणपरीतात्मा जायते भुवि मानवः । पशुपुत्राद्यन्नकामः कामभोगसुखानि च ।।१८।।
a human being is born on earth with his mind pervaded by rajas. He desires cattle, children, food, and the pleasures of sensual enjoyment. ॥१८॥

--- Page 12 ---

भुक्त्त्वान्ते दिवमासाद्य स्वर्गादिसुखमेष्यति । सोऽयंकालो मिश्रसत्त्वराजसो यदि वै भवेत् ॥१९॥
Having enjoyed [the pleasures of the world], he reaches heaven at the end and experiences the pleasures of heaven and the like. If the time of his entry is a mixture of sattva and rajas, ॥१९॥

सत्त्वराजससम्मिश्रो जायते भुवि मानवः । भोगासक्तः क्वचित्काले कचित्सात्त्विक कृत्यवान् ।।२०।।
a human being is born on earth with a mixture of sattva and rajas. He becomes attached to worldly enjoyments, while at times he also performs sāttvika acts. ॥२०॥

अन्ते स्वर्गसुखं भुक्त्वा ब्रह्मणा सह मुच्यते । तस्य प्रवेशकालस्तु तामसो यदि वे भवेत् ॥२१॥
At the end, having enjoyed the happiness of heaven, he becomes liberated together with Brahman. But if the time of his entry is dominated by tamas, ॥२१॥

तमसा मूढचित्तस्तु जायते भुवि मानवः । नित्यं कलहकारी च नित्यं द्रौहैकतत्परः ।॥२२॥
a human being is born on earth with a mind deluded by tamas. He is constantly quarrelsome and always intent upon causing harm. ॥२२॥

परदारपरद्रव्यपरिग्रहपरायणः । नित्यं पापसमाचारः परत्रेह न शर्मकृन ॥२३॥
He is devoted to taking other men's wives and other people's wealth. He constantly engages in sinful conduct and finds no happiness either here or hereafter. ॥२३॥

देहान्ते नरकं मुक्त्वा जायते भुवि कुत्सितः । कलिस्तु तामसाधारः प्रायेणात्र तु तामसाः ॥२४॥
After death, having undergone hell, he is born again on earth in a degraded condition. The Kali age is based upon tamas, and therefore most people here are tamasic. ॥२४॥

जनिष्यन्ति विशेषेण सत्त्वोद्रिक्ताः कचित्कचित् । सर्वशक्तिक्षयकरः कलिर्दोषनिधिस्ततः ॥२५॥
Only occasionally will those in whom sattva predominates be born. Therefore, Kali is a destroyer of all spiritual strength and a repository of faults. ॥२५॥

तस्माद्व्रतोपवासाद्य कलौ नैव समाचरेत् । प्रत्याम्नायादिरूपेण प्राजापत्यादिकं चरेन ॥२६।।
Therefore, in the Kali age, one should not undertake vows, fasts, and similar practices in their ordinary form; instead, one should perform Prājāpatya and other such expiations in the form of prescribed substitutes. ॥२६॥

द्वितीयवर्षमारभ्य यावद्विशतिवत्सरम् । महापापोपपापादि युक्तस्त्त्वात्र्त्ता भवेद्यदि ।।२७॥
From the second year up to the twentieth year, if a person afflicted with great sins, secondary sins, and similar transgressions seeks purification, ॥२७॥

पूर्वोक्तहोमसंयुक्तमधमर्पणमेव च । सहस्रकलशस्नानमब्लिङ्गशतमज्जनम् ॥२८॥
he should perform the previously mentioned homas, together with Aghamarṣaṇa, bathe with a thousand pots of sanctified water, and immerse himself one hundred times in the waters associated with the Aṅbaliṅga. ॥२८॥

पञ्चगव्यप्राशनं च सर्वं कृत्वा विशुद्धयति । एवं यः कुरुते सम्यक सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते ॥२९॥
Having properly performed all these rites, including drinking Pañcagavya, he becomes purified. Whoever performs these rites correctly is freed from all sins. ॥२९॥

--- Page 13 ---

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

सहस्रकलशानां तु स्थापनं कथमुच्यते । कथं मण्डलसंस्थानं विस्तरेण वदस्व मे ॥३०॥
Tell me in detail how the thousand pots are to be installed and how the arrangement of the maṇḍala is to be made. ॥३०॥

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsas said:

शृणु मे विस्तरेणेह नारायण महामुने । सहस्रकलशानां तु स्थापनस्य विधिक्रमम् ॥३१॥
Listen to me in detail, O great sage Nārāyaṇa, concerning the procedure for installing the thousand pots. ॥३१॥

यच्छ्रत्त्वासर्वतापेभ्यो मुच्यते नात्र संशयः । नद्यास्तीरे तटाकस्य तीरे वा सुमनोहरे ॥३२॥
By hearing this, one is freed from all afflictions; there is no doubt about it. On the bank of a river or on the bank of a beautiful pond, ॥३२॥

शालां विशालां विधिवत् ष‌ट्त्रिंशत्पदसंमितां । षोडशस्तम्भसंयुक्तां प्रपां तत्र प्रकल्पयेत् ॥३३॥
one should properly construct a spacious pavilion measuring thirty-six units, provided with sixteen pillars, and prepare a covered hall there. ॥३३॥

कलीस्तम्भपूगालिमिश्रितां सुमनोहराम् । कृत्वा ततो वितानाद्य स्तोरणाद्य श्वभूषयेत् ॥३४॥
Having made it beautiful, adorned with rows of areca palms and pillars, one should then decorate it with canopies, festoons, and other ornaments. ॥३४॥

चतुरश्रां मध्यदेशे दशपादयुतां भुवम् । वेदिकां कल्पयेत्सम्यक चतुरङ्गुलमुन्नताम् ॥३५॥
In the central area, one should properly prepare a square altar measuring ten units on each side and raised four fingers in height. ॥३५॥

ईशान्यादि चतुर्दिक्षु तथैव परिकल्पयेत् । गोमयेन समालिप्य निम्नोन्नतविवर्जिताम् ॥३६॥
Likewise, one should prepare [the corresponding arrangements] in the four directions beginning with the northeast, plastering them with cow dung and making the surface free from depressions and elevations. ॥३६॥

पञ्चम्यगणैरलंकृत्य ब्रीहिभारैस्ततस्तरेत् । सुधूपितान् सूत्रवस्त्रवेष्टितान् सुमनोहरान् ॥३७॥
Having decorated it with groups of pañcami [ornaments/arrangements], one should then cover it with heaps of rice. The beautiful [pots], properly fumigated and wrapped with thread and cloth, ॥३७॥

कलशान् द्विशतं सम्यक् कलशाक्षतशोभितान् । पञ्चत्वक्पल्लवैर्मिश्रान् नालिकेराम्लपल्लवैः ।।३८।।
two hundred pots should be properly prepared, adorned with unbroken rice grains, and filled or furnished with the five kinds of bark and fresh leaves, together with coconut and mango leaves. ॥३८॥

सुकूर्चेश्च शुर्चे देशे स्थापयित्वाऽथ देशिकः । पुण्याहवाचनं कृत्त्वा संप्रोक्ष्य कलशानथ ।।३९।।
The officiating teacher should place them in a clean and auspicious place, perform the Puṇyāha-vācana, and then sprinkle and consecrate the pots. ॥३९॥

--- Page 14 ---

एकं कलशमादाय स्थापयेद्ब्रीहिमध्यतः । परितश्चाष्टकलशान् विरलान् परिकल्पयेत् ॥४०॥
Taking one pot, it should be placed in the midst of the rice, and eight pots should be arranged around it at intervals. ॥४०॥

ततो विंशतिसङ्ख्याकान् द्वात्रिंशत्सङ्ख्यकांस्ततः । चत्वारिंशच्च कलशान् चक्राकारान्यथाक्रमम् ॥४१॥
Then twenty pots, thereafter thirty-two pots, and then forty pots should be arranged successively in the form of a wheel. ॥४१॥

ततः शिरःप्रदेशे तु प्राच्यादिचतुरोन्यसेत् । मध्ये त्वेकं तु संस्थाप्य पार्श्वयोरुभयोरपि ॥४२॥॥
Then, at the head portion, four pots beginning with the eastern direction should be placed. One should be placed in the middle, and also on both sides. ॥४२॥

कलशत्रितयं दक्षे वामे च कलशत्रयम् । चक्रस्य दक्षिणे पार्श्वे कलशानां तु पञ्चकम् ॥४३॥
Three pots should be placed on the right and three pots on the left. On the right side of the wheel, five pots should be arranged. ॥४३॥

विन्यस्य मध्यमे त्वेकं तथैकं शिरसि न्यसेत् । ततस्त्वधः प्रदेशे तु रेखाद्वयसमाकृतीन् ।॥४४।।
Having arranged them, one pot should be placed in the middle and one at the head. Then, in the lower portion, [arrange the pots] in the form of two lines. ॥४४॥

कलशान्दश विन्यस्य तथैवोत्तरतश्चरेत् । चक्रस्याधः प्रदेशे तु स्थाप्यैकं कलशं ततः ॥४५॥
Having arranged ten pots, one should proceed in the same manner toward the north. Then one pot should be placed in the lower portion of the wheel. ॥४५॥

परितः परिकल्प्याथ कलशान्षड्यथाक्रमम् । पार्श्वयोरुभयोस्तद्वत् प्रत्येकं कलशद्वयम् ॥४६॥
Then six pots should be arranged around it in due order, and likewise two pots should be placed on each of the two sides. ॥४६॥

अधस्तात्कलशानां तु षट्कस्य त्रितयं तथा । अधस्तात्कलशद्वन्द्व स्थापयेद्विप्रसत्तमः ।।४७।।
Below the group of six pots, three pots should likewise be placed, and below them the excellent Brāhmaṇa should place a pair of pots. ॥४७॥

एवं कृते भवेत्स्पष्ट साक्षाच्चक्राकृतिः क्रमात् । ईशान्यादिचतुर्दिक्षु कल्पयेदेवमेव हि ॥४८॥
When this has been done, the wheel-shaped arrangement becomes clearly manifest. The same arrangement should be made in the four directions beginning with the northeast. ॥४८॥

पञ्चचक्राकृतिरियं महापापप्रणाशिनी । उपपातकदोषघ्न्नी अतिपात्तकवारिणी ॥४९॥
This five-wheel arrangement destroys great sins, removes the faults arising from minor sins, and wards off grave transgressions. ॥४९॥

दुर्देशगमने चैव दुःस्त्रीसङ्गमे (मके)षु च । समुद्रलङ्घने चैव नौयानमवलम्ब्य च ।।५०॥
It is [prescribed for purification] in the case of going to forbidden lands, association with immoral women, crossing the sea, and undertaking journeys by ship. ॥५०॥

--- Page 15 ---

द्वीपान्तरगतौ चैव चण्डालस्त्रीनिषेवणे । सन्ध्यादिकर्मणां चैव श्राद्धादीनां च लोपने ॥५१॥
Likewise, for going to foreign islands, consorting with Chandāla women, and neglecting Sandhyā and other obligatory rites, as well as Śrāddha and other prescribed observances. ॥५१॥

ब्रह्मन्नादिसहावासे तुलुष्कादिसमागमे । सर्वेषामपि पापानामियमेका हि निष्कृतिः ॥५२।।
For dwelling together with those who eat the flesh of Brāhmaṇas and for associating with Tulushkas and others, this alone is the expiation for all sins. ॥५२॥

भक्त्या परमया युक्त इमां निष्कृतिमाचरेत् । पराकमप्यकुर्वाणः पञ्चविंशतिसङ्ख्यया ॥५३॥
One should perform this expiation with supreme devotion; even one who is unable to perform the Parāka penance should perform this [rite] twenty-five times. ॥५३॥

तप्तत्रिशतपूर्व तु भूगर्भ प्रथमं चरेत् । गोगर्भ वटगर्भ च सवं साङ्ग समाचरेत् ॥५४॥
First, one should perform the Bhūgarbha rite preceded by three hundred Taptakṛcchras; then one should duly perform the Gogarbha and Vaṭagarbha rites together with all their accompanying rites. ॥५४॥

ब्राह्मः पूर्ववच्छ्रुद्धो जायते स्फटिकोपमः । स्वकर्म परकर्मार्हो जायते तदनन्तरम् ॥५५॥
He then becomes purified in the manner prescribed earlier, becoming like crystal in purity; thereafter he becomes fit to perform his own duties and the duties prescribed for others. ॥५५॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ विशेषविधानंनाम पञ्चमोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti, entitled “Special Prescriptions.”

अथ षष्ठोऽध्यायः
Now, the sixth chapter.

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said.

सहस्रकलशस्नानं कथं कार्य महामुने ।
O great sage, how is the bathing with a thousand pots to be performed?

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsā said.

स्वर्णराजतताम्रांश्च मृण्मयान्वा विशेषतः ॥ १ ॥
They should be made of gold, silver, copper, or, in particular, clay. ॥ १ ॥

ससूत्रवस्त्रान् सच्छिद्रान सालङ्कारान्सुश्रूपितान् । सहस्रसङ्ख्यान् कलशान् तण्डुलादिपरिष्कृते ॥ २॥
One thousand pots should be prepared, furnished with sacred threads and cloth, having openings, adorned with ornaments, and beautifully decorated, and placed upon a surface prepared with rice and other auspicious materials. ॥ २॥

--- Page 16 ---

दिश्यैशान्यां तथाऽऽग्नय्यां निऋत्यां मरुतो दिशि । मध्ये च स्थापयेद्विप्रः कलशान् द्विशतं क्रमात् ॥ ३ ॥
In the Īśāna (northeastern), Āgneya (southeastern), Nairṛtya (southwestern), and Vāyu (northwestern) directions, and in the center, the Brāhmaṇa should arrange two hundred pots in each place, in due order. ॥ ३ ॥

शुद्धोदकैस्समापूर्य नालिकेराम्रपल्लवैः । समलङ्कृत्य विधिवत् वरुणं च प्रचेतसम् ॥४॥
Having filled them with pure water and properly adorned them with coconut and mango leaves, [he should invoke] Varuṇa, the lord of the waters, Pracetas. ॥४॥

आवाह्यापां पतिं चैव सुरूपिणमथाह्वयेत् । नैवेद्यान्तैस्तमभ्यर्च्य ऋत्विग्भिस्सहदेशिकः ॥ ५॥
Having invoked the beautiful Lord of the Waters, the Ācārya, together with the Ṛtviks, should worship him with offerings, concluding with the offering of food. ॥ ५॥

शन्नोदेवीस्त्वापो वा द्रुपदादिव इत्यपि । आपोहिष्ठा हिरण्याद्य मन्त्रस्सम्मन्त्र्य मन्त्रवित् ॥ ६ ॥
The knower of mantras should consecrate [the water] with the mantras beginning with “Śaṃ no devīḥ,” “Āpo vā,” “Drupadād iva,” “Āpo hi ṣṭhā,” and “Hiraṇya” and others. ॥ ६ ॥

गायत्र्या प्रणवेनैव त्ववरोहणमार्गतः । सकूचैःश्च (१) स्थानं प्रोक्षणमेव वा । कारयेत् सर्वपापेभ्यो मुच्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ ७॥
By means of the Gāyatrī and the Praṇava, following the prescribed descending procedure, he should perform the sprinkling or bathing of the place with the kuśa grass; by this, one is freed from all sins—of this there is no doubt. ॥ ७॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ सहस्रकलशाभिषेको नाम षष्ठोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti, entitled “The Abhiṣeka with a Thousand Pots.”

अथ सप्तमोऽध्यायः
Now, the seventh chapter.

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said.

कलौ तु कानि कर्माणि वर्ज्यानि परिचक्ष्व मे ।
Tell me which practices are to be avoided in the Kali Yuga.

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsā said.

शृणु नारायण ब्रह्मन् सावधानतयाऽच मे ॥ १ ॥
Listen carefully, O Nārāyaṇa, O Brāhmaṇa. ॥ १ ॥

कलौ तु पापबाहुल्यात् वर्जनीयानि मानवैः । विधवापुनरुद्वाहौ नौयात्रा तु समुद्रतः ॥२॥
In the Kali Yuga, because of the abundance of sin, the following should be avoided by human beings: the remarriage of widows and voyages by ship across the sea. ॥२॥

--- Page 17 ---

आतिश्य (? प्राशनस) करणार्थ तु मधुपर्केपशोर्वधः । शूद्रान्नभोज्यता विप्रैः तीर्थसेवी च दूरतः ॥ ३॥
For the purpose of performing the prescribed ritual of hospitality, the killing of an animal for the Madhuparka, the eating of food prepared by Śūdras by Brāhmaṇas, and the avoidance of pilgrimage by keeping away from sacred places [were among the practices mentioned]. ॥ ३॥

सर्ववर्णेषु भिक्षूणां भैक्षाचर्य विधानतः । ब्राह्मणादिषु गेहेषु शूद्रस्य पचनक्रिया ॥४॥
For mendicants of all varṇas, alms-seeking was prescribed according to the established rules; and Śūdras were to cook in the houses of Brāhmaṇas and others. ॥४॥

भृग्वग्निपतनं चाष्टौ कर्माण्येतानि वर्जयेत् । अवर्जयित्वात्वेतानि शास्त्रोक्तमिति बुद्धितः ॥५॥
The practice of entering the fire as an act of self-immolation, along with these other practices, should be avoided. One who fails to avoid them, thinking that they are sanctioned by the scriptures, [is condemned in this text]. ॥५॥

कलौ युगे विशेषेण पतितस्स्यान्न संशयः । कृतादौ तु महीपालो वेनो नाम नृपोत्तमः ॥६॥
In the Kali Yuga especially, one who follows these practices would undoubtedly become fallen. In the beginning of the Kṛta Yuga, however, there was a great king named Vena. ॥६॥

शशास पृथिवीं सर्वा सकुलाद्रिमहार्णवाम् । दुरात्मा स तु कृत्येन ब्राह्मणानन्वशासत ॥७॥
He ruled over the entire earth, together with its mountains and great oceans. But that wicked-souled king, through his actions, subjected the Brāhmaṇas to his authority. ॥७॥

यूयमद्यप्रभृति वै समुद्र यानमार्गतः । द्वीपाद्वीपान्तरं गत्त्वा कुरुध्वं सर्वविक्रयम् ॥८॥
“From this day onward, travel across the sea by ship, go from one island to another, and engage in all forms of commerce. ॥८॥

विधवापुनरुद्वाहं यथेच्छं न विचारणा । पशुभक्षमातिथ्यव्याजेनाचरथ द्विजाः ॥९॥
Remarry widows according to your desire, without consideration; and, O Brāhmaṇas, partake of animals under the pretext of offering hospitality to guests. ॥९॥

गृहे पचन्तु युष्माकं शूद्राःश्राद्ध ऽपि नित्यशः । तीर्थसेवाव्याजमात्रात् त्यजध्वं श्रौतकर्म च ॥१०॥
Let Śūdras cook in your homes, even for the Śrāddha rites, on a regular basis. Under the mere pretext of undertaking pilgrimage, abandon the Śrauta rites as well. ॥१०॥

यतयस्सर्ववर्णेषु भिक्षां कुर्वन्तु कामतः । ब्राह्मणाश्शूद्रगेहेषु भुञ्जन्तु च यथेच्छया ॥११॥
Let ascetics of all varṇas freely seek alms as they wish; and let Brāhmaṇas eat in the houses of Śūdras according to their desire. ॥११॥

कालासहिष्णवो वृद्धाः भृगुपातं चरन्तु भोः । यो मच्छासनमत्युग्रमन्यथाकर्तुमिच्छति ॥१२॥
Let the old, who are unable to endure the passage of time, perform Bhṛgu-pāta, [self-immolation by casting themselves into fire]. Whoever wishes to act contrary to my exceedingly harsh command— ॥१२॥

असिना तीक्ष्णधारेण वध्य एव न संशयः । इति वेन वचश्श्रुत्वा पर्यतप्यन्त पीडिताः ॥१३॥
—shall undoubtedly be put to death with a sharp-edged sword.” Hearing these words of Vena, those who were oppressed and afflicted became deeply distressed. ॥१३॥

--- Page 18 ---

शप्तो यदि भवेदेष राज्यं भूयादनायकम् । अशप्तश्चेद्भवेत्पीडा कथं कार्यमितः परम् ॥१४॥
If he is cursed, the kingdom will become without a ruler; but if he is not cursed, oppression will continue. What should be done hereafter? ॥१४॥

इति चिन्त्य (१) महात्मानः सङ्घीभूय सभान्तरे । वेनं महीपतिं ब्रूयुः विप्राः प्राणपरीप्सवः ॥१५॥
Having reflected thus, the great sages assembled in the royal court and, desiring to preserve their lives, spoke to King Vena. ॥१५॥

भो भो वेन महीपाल किमर्थ नः प्रबाधसे । अशास्त्रीयानिमान् कृत्वाऽमहर्षिकथितान् प्रभो ॥१६॥
“O Vena, O king of the earth, why are you troubling us, O lord, by imposing these practices that are contrary to scripture and not taught by the great sages? ॥१६॥

निपातयसि नो घोरे निरये किं फलं तव । ऋषिभाषितमेवाद्य करिष्यामो महीपते ॥१७॥
What benefit will you gain by casting us into dreadful hell? O king of the earth, from this day onward we shall follow only what has been taught by the sages. ॥१७॥

नान्यत् किञ्चित् करिष्यामः प्राणैः कण्ठगतैरपि । एतच्छ्रुत्वाऽथ भूपालो वैनः क्रोधपरिप्लुतः ॥१८॥
We shall do nothing else, even if our lives are at stake.” Hearing this, King Vena became overwhelmed with anger. ॥१८॥

अष्टादशसहस्र तु ऋषीनानाय्य सत्वरम् । स्तम्भेषु पङ्क्तिशो बद्ध्वा केशैरभिहनत्स्वयं ॥१९॥
He immediately summoned eighteen thousand sages, bound them in rows to pillars by their hair, and personally struck them. ॥१९॥

तेन संपीड्यमानास्ते घोषयांचक्रिरे नृपम् । भो भो राजन् महीपाल किमर्थ नः प्रबाधसे ॥२०॥
Being tormented by him, they cried out to the king: “O king, O ruler of the earth, why are you tormenting us?” ॥२०॥

।। वेनउवाच ।।
Vena said:

अमनोरञ्जकान्यद्य शास्त्राणि (रचितानि) हि। रञ्जकान्येव सर्वेषु वदध्वं तत्प्रियं मम ।।२१।।
“Today, the scriptures that are displeasing [to the people] have been composed. Speak only those teachings that are pleasing to everyone and that are agreeable to me. ॥२१॥

नानादेशेषु विप्राद्याः नौयानात्प्रचरन्तु भोः । विधवापुनरुद्वाहं चरन्तु पृथिवीतले ।॥२२॥॥
Let Brāhmaṇas and others travel to various countries by ship; let widow remarriage be practiced throughout the earth. ॥२२॥

प्रचरन्तु पशोहिंसां मधुपर्के द्विजातयः । शूद्रगेहेषु भुंजन्तु द्विजगेहे पचन्तु ते ॥२३॥
Let the twice-born practice the killing of animals in the Madhuparka ceremony; let the twice-born eat in Śūdra houses, and let them have [Śūdras] cook in the houses of the twice-born. ॥२३॥

--- Page 19 ---

भिक्षवस्सर्ववर्णेषु भैक्षाचयं चरन्तु च । दीर्घकालासहा वृद्धाश्चरन्तु भृगुपातनम् ॥२४॥॥
Let mendicants of all varṇas practice alms-seeking, and let the elderly who are unable to endure the hardships of prolonged life perform Bhṛgu-pāta. ॥२४॥

काममग्नीन् परित्यज्य तीर्थसेवां चरन्तु च । इत्याकर्ण्य च तद्वाक्यं वेपमाना महर्षयः ॥२५॥
“Let them abandon the sacred fires as they wish and undertake pilgrimages.” Hearing these words, the great sages trembled with fear. ॥२५॥

नौयात्राद्य त्वष्टकर्मह्यनुजानन्ति दुःखिताः । ततो विसृज्य भूपालो महर्षीनमितौजसः ॥२६॥
Distressed, they consented to the eight practices beginning with sea voyages. Then the king released the great sages of immeasurable power. ॥२६॥

शशास पूर्ववत् पृथ्वीं परिपूर्णमनोरथः । ततः प्रभृति विप्राद्याः नौयात्राद्यष्टकर्मणि ॥२७॥
With all his desires fulfilled, he ruled the earth as before. From that time onward, the Brāhmaṇas and others engaged in the eight practices beginning with sea voyages. ॥२७॥

प्रवृत्ता ऋषिवाक्येन धर्मबुद्धया च मोहिताः । युगत्रयेषु यातेषु ततः प्राप्ते कलौ युगे ॥२८॥
They became involved in these practices, deluded by the words of the sages and by their understanding of dharma. After three Yugas had passed, when the Kali Yuga arrived, ॥२८॥

बदरीवनमासाद्य सङ्घीभूय महर्षयः । विचिन्त्य विधियोगेन कृत्यान्येतान्यवारयन् ॥२९॥
the great sages reached Badarīvana, assembled together, deliberated according to the prescribed order, and prohibited these practices. ॥२९॥

तस्मात् कलौ त्विमान् धर्मान् वर्ज्यानाहुर्महर्षयः । कलौयुगे तु संप्राप्त नौयात्रादि करोति यः ॥३०॥
Therefore, the great sages have declared that these practices are to be avoided in the Kali Yuga. Whoever, after the arrival of the Kali Yuga, undertakes sea voyages and the other such practices, ॥३०॥

पतित्वा निरये घोरे दुःखमेति महत्तरम् । तस्मादिमान् कलौधर्मान् वर्ज्यानाहुर्महर्षयः ॥३१॥
falls into a dreadful hell and experiences great suffering. Therefore, the great sages have declared these practices to be prohibited in the Kali Yuga. ॥३१॥

इमान् कृत्बा कलियुगे निष्कृतिर्न विधीयते । यदि निष्कृतिमापन्नः सेतुस्नानादिना कचित् ।।३२।।
Having performed these acts in the Kali Yuga, no expiation is prescribed. Even if someone happens to attain purification through bathing at Setu or by similar means, ॥३२॥

तथाऽपि न परिग्राह्यः पापबाहुल्यकं यतः । किमन्यच्छ्रोतु कामोऽसि वदस्व द्विजनन्दन ॥३३॥
even then it should not be accepted as sufficient, because of the abundance of sin. What else do you wish to hear? Tell me, O delight of the twice-born. ॥३३॥

इति श्रीनारायणम्मृतौ नौयात्राद्यष्टकर्मणानिषेधोनाम सप्तमोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti, entitled “The Prohibition of the Eight Practices Beginning with Sea Voyages.”

--- Page 20 ---
अथाष्टमोऽध्यायः
Now, the eighth chapter.

अष्टनिषिद्धकर्मणां प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
The description of expiation for the eight prohibited practices.

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said.

भो भो ब्रह्मन् वदस्वाद्य विस्तरेण ममाधुना । अबुद्धया बुद्धिपूर्व वा कलिवर्ज्यानिमान्द्विजः ॥ १॥
O Brāhmaṇa, tell me now in detail: if a twice-born person, either unknowingly or knowingly, performs these acts prohibited in the Kali Yuga, ॥ १॥

कृत्वा ततः परंभूयः पश्चात्पापपरायणः । शरणं यदि संप्राप्तः कथं निष्कृतिरुच्यते ॥ २ ॥
and thereafter, having again become devoted to sinful conduct, finally seeks refuge, what expiation is prescribed for him? ॥ २॥

केनैव विधिना सन्यग् बन्धुमध्ये प्रवेशनम् । किं कृत्वा मुच्यते पापात् कथं कर्मार्हता भवेत् ॥ ३ ॥
By what procedure can he properly re-enter the community of his relatives? What must he do to become free from sin, and how can he regain eligibility to perform the prescribed rites? ॥ ३॥

एतदाचक्ष्व भगवन् संशयो जायते महान् ।
Tell me this, O Bhagavān, for a great doubt has arisen in me.

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsā said.

शृणु नारायण श्रीमन् गदतो मम विस्तरात् ॥ ४॥
Listen, O illustrious Nārāyaṇa, as I explain this to you in detail. ॥ ४॥

गङ्गास्नानं वर्षमात्रं मासं सेतुनिमज्जनम् । साङ्गं च विधिवत्कृत्वा व्यवहार्यो भवेदिह ॥ ५॥
By bathing in the Ganges for one year and immersing oneself at Setu for one month, performing the complete rite properly and according to the prescribed procedure, one becomes fit to re-enter social and religious conduct here. ॥ ५॥

भवेत्स्वकर्ममात्रस्य भविता त्वर्हता द्विज । परकर्मणि नैवार्हः भवेदेव न संशयः ॥ ६ ॥
A twice-born person thereby regains eligibility only for his own prescribed duties; he does not become eligible for the duties belonging to another, of this there is no doubt. ॥ ६॥

तस्मादिमान् कलियुगे वर्ज्यानष्टौ ब्रुवन्ति हि । असाध्यत्वात्कलौ काले द्रव्यव्ययविशेषतः ॥ ७॥
Therefore, these eight practices are declared to be prohibited in the Kali Yuga, because they are difficult to expiate in this age and especially because of the considerable expenditure of resources involved. ॥ ७॥

यदि सर्वस्वदानेन चित्तं चरितुमिच्छति । तदाऽसौ सर्वकर्माहों भवेदेव न संशयः ॥८॥
If, however, he wishes to undertake the expiation by giving away all his possessions, then he becomes eligible for all prescribed duties; of this there is no doubt. ॥८॥

--- Page 21 ---

तद्य तव वक्ष्यामि रहस्यमिदमुत्तमम् । यदा प्रवृत्तस्त्येतस्मिन् तद्दिनं परिगण्य च ॥९॥
Now I shall tell you this supreme secret. From the day on which one undertakes this [expiatory observance], that day should be counted as the beginning. ॥९॥

चान्द्रायणद्वयं नित्यं कर्तव्यमविशङ्कया । पूर्वोत्तराङ्गसंयुक्त अब्लिङ्गशतमन्त्रितम् ॥१०॥
Two Cāndrāyaṇa observances should be performed regularly without hesitation, together with the prescribed preceding and concluding rites, and accompanied by one hundred recitations of the Ābliṅga mantras. ॥१०॥

सहस्रकलशस्नानं पञ्चवारुणहोमकम् । कुश्मा (ग्म) ण्डगणहोमानां शतं पाहि त्रयोदशैः ॥११॥
A bath with a thousand pots should be performed, together with five Varuṇa homas, one hundred Kūṣmāṇḍa-gaṇa homas, and the thirteen Pāhi homas. ॥११॥

शतं तु विरजाहोमं गायत्रीशतहोमकम् । तिलहोमसहस्रश्च गर्भ च वटभूगवाम् ॥१२॥
One hundred Virajā homas and one hundred Gāyatrī homas should be performed, along with one thousand Tila homas, and the prescribed rites of the Gogarbhā, Vaṭagarbhā, and Bhūgarbhā. ॥१२॥

मज्जनं गोमयहृदे गोदानं द्वादशाचरेत् । दशदानं भूरिदानं सहस्रब्रह्मभोजनम् ॥१३॥
One should bathe in a pond of cow dung, give twelve cows in charity, perform the ten prescribed gifts, make abundant charitable donations, and feed one thousand Brāhmaṇas. ॥१३॥

एवमादि यथाशास्त्रं धनव्ययमचिन्त्य तु । सन्तुष्टचित्तः कृत्वा (सततं) गुद्धिमाप्नोत्यसंशयः ॥१४॥
In this manner, and according to the injunctions of the scriptures, without worrying about the expenditure of wealth, one should perform these rites with a contented mind; by doing so, one undoubtedly attains purification. ॥१४॥

स्वकर्मपरकार्मार्हो भवेदेव न संशयः ।
He thereby becomes eligible for his own duties as well as the duties of others; of this there is no doubt.

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ कलावष्टविधवर्ज्यकर्म प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनंनाम अष्टमोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti, entitled “The Description of Expiation for the Eight Prohibited Practices in the Kali Yuga.”

--- Page 22 ---

अथ नवमोऽध्यायः
The Ninth Chapter

धनहीनाय प्रायश्चित्तवर्णनम्
The Description of Expiation for One Who Is Without Wealth

नारायण उवाच ।
Nārāyaṇa said:

भगवन् सर्वधर्मज्ञ शरणागतवत्सल । अकिञ्चनानामार्त्तानां कलिवर्ज्यकृतां नृणाम् ॥ १ ॥
O Bhagavān, knower of all dharma and compassionate toward those who seek refuge, what expiation is prescribed for those afflicted persons who, being without possessions, have performed the practices prohibited in the Kali Yuga? ॥१॥

कथं निष्कृतिरादिष्टा वद मे शिष्यवत्सल ।
Tell me what expiation has been prescribed for them, O compassionate one toward your disciples.

दुर्वासा उवाच ।
Durvāsā said:

त्तात ते कथयाम्यद्य शृणु वात्सल्यगौरवात् ॥ २॥
My dear one, I shall tell you today. Listen with affection and attention. ॥२॥

अत्यन्तात्तॊ यदि ब्रह्मन् अधनः कलिवर्ज्यकृत् । शरणं यदि संप्राप्तः प्रायश्चित्तमिदं वदेत् ॥३॥
O Brāhmaṇa, if one who has performed the practices prohibited in the Kali Yuga is extremely afflicted and without wealth, and comes seeking refuge, the following expiation is prescribed for him. ॥३॥

सशिखं वपनं कृत्वा नित्यकर्मपरायणः । पुण्यतीर्थे हृदे वाऽपि पुष्करिण्यामथाऽपिवा ॥४॥
Having his hair shaved while retaining the śikhā, and remaining devoted to his daily duties, he should go to a sacred place of pilgrimage, a holy lake, or a pond. ॥४॥

आकण्ठजलसम्मग्नः प्राङ्‌मुखस्त्वघमर्षणम् । शिरस्यञ्जलिमाधाय जप्त्वा स्नानं समाचरेत् ॥ ५॥
Standing immersed in water up to the neck and facing east, he should perform the Aghamarṣaṇa recitation, holding joined palms above his head, and then bathe. ॥५॥

पुनर्जप्त्वा पुनस्स्नात्वा पुनजपमथाचरेत् । एवं मध्याह्नपर्यन्तं प्राङमुस्वस्स्नानमाचरेत् ॥ ६॥
He should again recite, again bathe, and again perform the recitation. In this manner, he should continue bathing while facing east until midday. ॥६॥

माध्याह्निकं ततः कृत्वा समाराध्येष्टदेवताम् । ततः प्रत्यङ्‌मुखो भूत्वा पूर्ववत्स्नानमाचरेत् ॥ ७ ॥
Then, after performing the midday rites and worshipping his chosen deity, he should turn to face west and bathe in the same manner as before. ॥७॥

सायाह्ने समनुप्राप्ते तटमुत्तीर्य वाग्यतः । न संमृजेच्छरीराणि वाससा वाऽपिपाणिना ॥ ८ ॥
When evening arrives, he should come out onto the bank, maintaining silence. He should not wipe or dry his body either with cloth or with his hands. ॥८॥

--- Page 23 ---

फलाष्टकप्रमाणेन तण्डुलेनहतिः पचेत् । गोमूत्रे विनिवेद्य व हरये परमात्मने ॥ ९ ॥
Using rice in the quantity of eight fruits, he should prepare the food and offer it in cow urine to Hari, the Supreme Self. ॥९॥

तदेव भुत्क्त्वा सायाह्न स्वपेद्ध दक्षिणाशिरः । एवं षण्मासकृद्विप्रः पूर्ववत्च्छुद्धिमाप्नुयात् ॥१०॥
Having eaten that very food in the evening, he should sleep with his head toward the south. A Brāhmaṇa should perform this practice for six months and thereby attain purification as prescribed earlier. ॥१०॥

ततो गङ्गाजले स्नात्त्वा सेतुदर्शनमेव वा । कृत्वा ततः पुनः कर्म कृत्वा शुद्धिमवाप्नुयात् ॥११॥
Thereafter, he should bathe in the waters of the Ganges or undertake the prescribed pilgrimage to Setu; having done so, he should perform the required rites again and attain purification. ॥११॥

स्वकर्मपरकर्मार्हो भवेदेव न संशयः । एवं सम्यक् समादिष्ट श्रुत्वा नारायणो मुनिः ॥१२॥
He then becomes eligible for his own duties as well as the duties of others; of this there is no doubt. Having properly heard these instructions, the sage Nārāyaṇa, ॥१२॥

विच्छिन्नसंशयो भूत्त्वा परमानन्दनिर्भरः । मेरुष्पृष्ठमुपागम्य तपश्चतु ययौ मुनिः ॥१३॥
his doubts completely dispelled and filled with supreme bliss, went to the summit of Mount Meru and undertook austerities. ॥१३॥

इति श्रीनारायणस्मृतौ कलौवर्ज्यकर्मप्रायश्चित्तवर्णनंनाम नवमोऽध्यायः ।
Thus ends the ninth chapter of the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Smṛti, entitled “The Description of Expiation for Practices Prohibited in the Kali Yuga.”

