--- Page 1 ---
॥ ॐ तत्सद् ब्रह्मणे नमः ॥
Om Tat Sat, salutations to Brahman.

॥ प्रजापतिस्मृतिः ॥
Prajāpati Smṛti

श्रीगणेशाय नमः ।
Salutations to Śrī Gaṇeśa.

अथ ब्रह्माणं प्रति रुचेः प्रश्नः, श्राद्धकालाभिधानश्च
Now, Ruci's questions to Brahmā and the description of the proper times for Śrāddha.

पितुर्वाक्यार्थकारी च रुचिः प्रम्लोचया सह । नमस्योवाच देवेशं ब्रह्माणं जगतः पतिम् ॥१॥
Ruci, who was carrying out the wishes of his father, together with Pramlocā, respectfully addressed Brahmā, the Lord of the gods and the Lord of the universe. ॥१॥

ब्रह्मन्विष्णो विरिञ्चेति धातः शंभो प्रजापते । त्वत्प्रसादादिमं धर्मं जग्राह पितृवाक्यतः ॥२॥
O Brahman, O Viṣṇu, O Viriñci, O Creator, O Śambhu, O Prajāpati, by your grace I have learned this dharma through the words of my father. ॥२॥

अनया सह तीर्थेषु मया श्राद्धान्यनेकशः । कृतानि पितृतुष्ट्यर्थं धनार्थ पुत्रकाम्यया ॥३॥
Together with her, I have performed many Śrāddhas at sacred places, for the satisfaction of the ancestors, and with the desire for wealth and sons. ॥३॥

स्मृतयश्च पुराणानि त्वया दृष्टान्यनेकशः । दृष्टस्त्वनेकधा धातः श्राद्धकल्पः सविस्तरः ॥४॥
You have seen and revealed many Smṛtis and Purāṇas, O Creator, and you have also seen the various detailed prescriptions concerning the Śrāddha rites. ॥४॥

--- Page 2 ---


तथाऽप्यसंशयापन्नं क्रियमाणविधिं वद । येन विज्ञानमात्रेण न मुह्येऽहं कदाचन ॥५॥
Even so, tell me the procedure for performing the Śrāddha in such a way that, by merely knowing it, I may never again fall into doubt or confusion. ॥५॥

चतुर्णामपि वेदानां शाखाः सन्ति सहस्रशः । अज्ञानादल्पशास्त्रार्था मोहयन्ति पदे पदे ॥६॥
The four Vedas have thousands of branches, and because of ignorance and incomplete understanding of the meaning of the scriptures, one becomes confused at every step. ॥६॥

कस्मिन्काले च कर्तव्यं कर्ता श्राद्धस्य कीदृशः । द्रव्यं देशः पाककर्ता कदा विप्रान्निमन्त्रयेत् ॥७॥
At what time should the Śrāddha be performed? What qualifications should the performer possess? What should the materials and place be, who should prepare the food, and when should Brāhmaṇas be invited? ॥७॥

ब्राह्मणाः कीदृशास्तत्र नियमास्तत्र कीदृशाः । श्राद्धोपहारपात्राणि भक्ष्यं तत्कालदेवता ॥८॥
What kind of Brāhmaṇas should be invited, and what rules should be observed there? What vessels and offerings are appropriate for the Śrāddha, what food should be served, and which deities are to be worshipped at that time? ॥८॥

ततः श्राद्धेषु के मन्त्राः पदार्थादिक्रमः कथम् । आसनावाहनान्यर्थोऽग्नौ होमः पात्रालम्भनम् ॥९॥
Further, what mantras are to be used in the Śrāddha, and what is the proper sequence of the various articles? What is the procedure for offering seats and invoking the deities, what is the purpose of the fire-offering, and how should the vessels be handled? ॥९॥

विप्रभोज्यं पिण्डदानं क्षमापनविधिक्रमम् । श्वदेवं भृत्यभोज्यं वद सायंतनं विधिम् ॥१०॥
Tell me about feeding the Brāhmaṇas, offering the piṇḍas, the procedure for seeking forgiveness, the offering to dogs, the feeding of servants, and the evening rites. ॥१०॥

ब्रह्मोवाच -
Brahmā said:

पितरस्तव तुष्टा वै रुचे शृणु महामते । मालिन्यां रौच्यनामा वै त्वत्तः पुत्रो भविष्यति ॥११॥
O Ruci, O great-minded one, your ancestors are indeed pleased. Listen: from you, a son named Raucya will be born to Mālinī. ॥११॥

नदीं तर्तुमनाः पारं पराचारस्य वि(वे)त्ति कम् । कल्पशास्त्राणि स्मृतयः श्राद्धकल्पा बुधैर्द्विजाः कृताः ॥१२॥
Who can know the far shore of the vast ocean of ritual observances? Learned Brāhmaṇas have composed Kalpa texts, Smṛtis, and treatises on the performance of Śrāddha. ॥१२॥

ममापि संशयस्तत्र श्राद्धकल्पाम्बुधौ रुचे । तथाऽपि शास्त्राण्यालोच्य वक्ष्ये निःसंशयं वचः ॥१३॥
Even I, O Ruci, have doubts concerning the vast ocean of Śrāddha prescriptions. Nevertheless, after examining the scriptures, I shall tell you the matter without uncertainty. ॥१३॥

शास्त्रनिष्ठः शुक्रवाक्यैर्मुह्यन्ति द्विजसत्तमाः । भवन्ति बलिनस्तस्माद्राक्षसा बलहारिणः ॥१४॥
Even the foremost Brāhmaṇas who are devoted to scripture become confused by the various injunctions and statements of Śukra. Therefore, the Rākṣasas, who take away strength, become powerful. ॥१४॥

--- Page 3 ---

निरस्य शुक्रवाक्यानि सिद्धान्तस्मृतिनिश्चयम् । श्राद्धकल्पस्य वक्ष्येऽहं भक्त्या तुष्टो रुचे तव ॥१५॥
Setting aside the statements of Śukra, I shall explain the established conclusions of the Smṛtis concerning the proper performance of Śrāddha. I am pleased by your devotion, O Ruci. ॥१५॥

त्वया पृष्टं कदा श्राद्धं रुचे प्रम्लोचया सह । शृणु संक्षेपतो वच्मि कालकर्ता ह्यनुक्रमात् ॥१६॥
You have asked, O Ruci, together with Pramlocā, when Śrāddha should be performed. Listen; I shall briefly explain the proper times and the order in which it is to be performed. ॥१६॥

वृद्धौ क्षयेऽह्नि ग्रहणे युगादौ महालये श्राद्धममासु तीर्थे । सूर्यक्रमे पर्वसु वैधृतौ च रुचौ व्यतीपातगतेऽष्टकासु ॥१७॥
Śrāddha should be performed on occasions of increase and decrease, on the day of an eclipse, at the beginning of a Yuga, during Mahālaya, on Amāvāsyā, at sacred places, at Saṅkrānti, on Parvan days, during Vaidhṛti, at Vyatīpāta, and on the Aṣṭakā days, O Ruci. ॥१७॥

द्रव्यस्य संपत्सु मुनीन्द्रसङ्गे काम्येषु मन्वादिषु सव्रते स्यात् । छायासु मातंगभवासु नित्यं श्राद्धस्य कालः स च सर्वदोक्तः ॥१८॥
Śrāddha may also be performed when one has obtained wealth, in the company of great sages, for the fulfillment of desired purposes, on the occasions beginning with the Manvantaras, together with vows, and under the prescribed shadows and auspicious circumstances. Such occasions are declared to be suitable times for Śrāddha, and it is also said to be appropriate at all times. ॥१८॥

वृद्धौ प्राप्ते च यः कुर्याच्छ्राद्धं नान्दीमुखं पुमान् । तस्याऽऽरोग्यं यशः सौख्यं विवर्धन्ते धनप्रजाः ॥१९॥
When prosperity or an auspicious occasion has arisen, the person who performs Nandīmukha Śrāddha obtains increasing health, fame, happiness, wealth, and progeny. ॥१९॥

श्राद्धं कृतं येन महालयेऽस्मिन् पित्रोः क्षयाहे ग्रहणे गयायाम् । किमश्वमेधैः पुरुषैरनेकैः पुण्यैरिमैरन्यतमैः कृतैः किम् ॥२०॥
For one who has performed Śrāddha during this Mahālaya, on the death anniversary of the ancestors, during an eclipse, or at Gayā, what need is there for many Aśvamedha sacrifices or for the performance of numerous other meritorious acts? ॥२०॥

दर्शश्राद्धं च यः कुर्याद् ब्राह्मणैर्ब्रह्मवादिभिः । पितरस्तेन तुष्टा वै प्रयच्छन्ति यथेप्सितम् ॥२१॥
One who performs Darśa Śrāddha with Brāhmaṇas who are learned in Brahman—the ancestors, being pleased by him, grant whatever he desires. ॥२१॥

माघे पञ्चदशी कृष्णा नभस्ये च त्रयोदशी । तृतीया माधवे शुक्ला नवम्यूर्जे युगाद्यः ॥२२॥
The fifteenth day of the dark fortnight in Māgha, the thirteenth day in Nabhas, the third day of the bright fortnight in Mādhava, and the ninth day in Ūrja are among the beginnings of the Yugas. ॥२२॥

भाद्रे कलिर्द्वापरे चैव माचे त्रेतातृतीया नवमी कृते च । युगाद्यः पुण्यतमा इमाश्च दत्तं पितॄणां किल चाक्षयं स्यात् ॥२३॥
In Bhādra is the beginning of Kali; in Māgha, that of Dvāpara; the third day is associated with Tretā; and the ninth with Kṛta. These Yuga-beginnings are exceedingly meritorious, and whatever is offered to the ancestors on these occasions is said to become imperishable. ॥२३॥

यावदायाति तत्पर्व वर्धते द्विगुणक्रमम् । दिने दिनेऽखिलं दानं दत्तं वैधृत्तपर्वणि ॥२४॥
As the prescribed Parvan approaches, the merit increases successively twofold. Whatever gifts are given on each day during the Vaidhṛti Parvan likewise increase in merit. ॥२४॥

संक्रान्तौ च व्यतीपाते मन्वादिषु युगादिषु । श्रद्धया स्वल्पमात्रं च दत्तं कोटिगुणं भवेत् ॥२५॥
At Saṅkrānti, Vyatīpāta, the beginnings of the Manvantaras, and the beginnings of the Yugas, even a small offering made with faith becomes multiplied a crore-fold in merit. ॥२५॥

--- Page 4 ---


पूर्वजान्मनुजान्देवान्सति द्रव्ये न वै यजेत् । मन्दाग्नि रामयावी च दरिद्रश्च प्रजायते ॥२६॥
When one has the means, one should not neglect the worship of the ancestors, humans, and gods. Otherwise, one becomes afflicted with weak digestion and illness and is born into poverty. ॥२६॥

छायासु सोमोद्भवजासु पुण्यं देवार्चनं गोतिलभूप्रदानम् । करोति यो वै पितृपिण्डदानं दूरे न तस्यास्ति विभोर्विमानम् ॥२७॥
During the auspicious shadows arising from Soma, one who performs worship of the gods and gives cows, sesame, and land, and who offers piṇḍas to the ancestors, will not be far from the Lord's celestial abode. ॥२७॥

चन्द्रग्रहे लक्षगुणं प्रदत्तं विवधते कोटिगुणं रविग्रहे । गजाश्वभूरुक्मतिलाज्ययोषिद्दानस्य संख्या न मयाऽत्र गण्यते ॥२८॥
Whatever is given during a lunar eclipse increases a hundred thousandfold, while what is given during a solar eclipse increases ten-millionfold. I cannot even calculate here the merit of giving elephants, horses, land, gold, sesame, ghee, and women. ॥२८॥

पितॄणां नरकस्थानां जलं तीर्थस्य दुर्लभम् । तेन संतर्पिताः सर्वे स्वर्गं यान्तीति मद्वचः ॥२९॥
For ancestors who are dwelling in hell, water from a sacred pilgrimage place is difficult to obtain. When they are satisfied with such an offering, all of them attain heaven—this is my declaration. ॥२९॥

अष्टकासु च सर्वासु तथा चान्वष्टकासु च । पिण्डदानं प्रकर्तव्यमक्षय्यतृप्तिकारकम् ॥३०॥
On all the Aṣṭakā and Anvaṣṭakā days, piṇḍa offerings should be made, for they provide inexhaustible satisfaction to the ancestors. ॥३०॥

अष्टकासु च सर्वासु साग्निकैर्नवदैवतम् । पित्राद्यं मातृमध्यं च कर्तव्यं न निरग्निकैः ॥३१॥
On all the Aṣṭakā days, those who maintain the sacred fires should perform the rite with nine deities, beginning with the paternal ancestors and placing the maternal ancestors in the middle. Those without sacred fires should not perform it in this manner. ॥३१॥

महायज्ञरतः शान्तो लौकिकाग्निं च रक्षयेत् । धर्मशास्त्रोक्तमार्गी यः स साग्निकसमो मतः ॥३२॥
One who is devoted to the great sacrifices and is peaceful should maintain the household fire. One who follows the path prescribed by the Dharmaśāstras is regarded as equivalent to one who maintains the sacred fires. ॥३२॥

इष्टे गृहसमायाते पूज्ये यज्वनि मन्त्रदे । वेदज्ञैः सर्वशास्त्रज्ञैर्हव्यन्त्यखिलपूर्वजाः ॥३३॥
When the desired sacred fire has been brought into the household, and the venerable sacrificer and giver of mantras are present, all the ancestors receive the offerings through those who know the Vedas and all the Śāstras. ॥३३॥

व्रतस्थो व्रतसिद्ध्यर्थं श्राद्धं कुर्यादपिण्डकम् । विना श्राद्धं न यत्कर्म तत्सर्वं निष्फलं भवेत् ॥३४॥
One who is observing a vow should perform Śrāddha without piṇḍa offerings for the fulfillment of that vow. Without Śrāddha, whatever rite is performed becomes fruitless. ॥३४॥

सपिण्डदानं सौभाग्यं काम्यश्राद्धं त्रिपौरुषम् । कार्यं भार्यासु तेनैतत्सर्वकामफलप्रदम् ॥३५॥
The Sapinda offering is associated with prosperity and good fortune, while Kāmyā Śrāddha extends to three generations. It should be performed for one's wives, and thereby it bestows the fruits of all desires. ॥३५॥

नित्यश्राद्धं सदा कार्यं पितॄणां तृप्तिहेतुकम् । स विष्णुरिति विज्ञेयो नित्यं प्रीणाति पूर्वजान् ॥३६॥
Nitya Śrāddha should always be performed, as it is the means of satisfying the ancestors. The performer should be regarded as Viṣṇu himself, for he continually brings satisfaction to the forefathers. ॥३६॥

--- Page 5 ---


श्राद्धान्यनेकशः सन्ति पुराणोक्तानि वै रुचे । फलप्रदानि सर्वाणि तेषामग्र्यो महालयः ॥३७॥
There are many kinds of Śrāddha prescribed in the Purāṇas, O Ruci, and all of them bestow their respective fruits. Among them, Mahālaya is foremost. ॥३७॥

सत्यवाक् शुद्धचेता यः सत्यव्रतपरायणः । नित्यं धर्मरतः शान्तः स भिन्नालापवर्जितः ॥३८॥
The person who speaks the truth, whose mind is pure, who is devoted to the vow of truth, who is constantly engaged in Dharma, who is peaceful, and who avoids divisive or discordant speech— ॥३८॥

अद्रोहोऽस्तेयकर्मा च सर्वप्राणिहिते रतः । स्वस्त्रीरतः सविनयो नयचक्षुरकर्कशः ॥३९॥
One who bears no hatred, does not steal, is devoted to the welfare of all living beings, remains faithful to his own wife, is humble, possesses sound judgment, and is not harsh— ॥३९॥

पितृमातृवचःकर्ता गुरुवृद्धपरार्चकः । श्रद्धालुर्वेदशास्त्रज्ञः क्रियावान्भैक्ष्यजीवकः ॥४०॥
One who follows the words of his father and mother, honors teachers and elders, possesses faith, knows the Vedas and Śāstras, performs the prescribed rites, and lives by alms— ॥४०॥

स तु श्राद्धं यदा कुर्यात्पत्रपाकेन सद्द्विजैः । तदा श्राद्धसहस्रेण प्रीतिस्तज्जायते भृशम् ॥४१॥
When such a person performs Śrāddha with properly prepared food and worthy Brāhmaṇas, the ancestors become exceedingly pleased, as though a thousand Śrāddhas had been performed. ॥४१॥

तिर्यङ्मनुष्ययोनौ हि को भेदः श्रुत्तृषा समाः । सत्यवाङ् मानुषो धर्मः सुखं दुःखं समं स्मृतम् ॥४२॥
Among animals and human beings, what difference is there with regard to hunger and thirst? These are common to all. Truthful speech, however, is a distinctive human virtue, while pleasure and pain are understood to be common experiences. ॥४२॥

भैक्ष्यं द्रव्यं हि विप्राणां क्षत्रियाणां प्रजार्पितम् । वैश्यानां कृषिवाणिज्यं शूद्राणां सेवयाऽऽगतम् ॥४३॥
For Brāhmaṇas, wealth obtained through alms is proper; for Kṣatriyas, that which is entrusted by their subjects; for Vaiśyas, wealth obtained through agriculture and trade; and for Śūdras, that which is obtained through service. ॥४३॥

धनं पवित्रं विप्राणामस्ति तीर्थसमर्पितम् । तर्पयेत्तेन वै देवान्मृतान्पितृगणातिथीन् ॥४४॥
The wealth of Brāhmaṇas is considered purified when it is offered at sacred places. With such wealth, one should satisfy the gods, the departed ancestors, and guests. ॥४४॥

स्वस्तिवाच्य द्विजैर्नीतं धनं दुष्टप्रतिग्रहम् । अग्नितीर्थेषु पतितं सद्यो याति पवित्रताम् ॥४५॥
Wealth obtained by a Brāhmaṇa through improper or wrongful acceptance becomes purified when, after appropriate auspicious rites, it is cast into fire or consigned to sacred waters. ॥४५॥

अयाचितं धनं पूतं शुक्लवृत्त्या समागतम् । विवाहलब्धं विजितं पैत्रं शिष्यनिवेदितम् ॥४६॥
Wealth that comes unasked is pure; so too is wealth obtained through an upright livelihood, wealth received through marriage, wealth legitimately acquired, ancestral wealth, and wealth offered by a disciple. ॥४६॥

ब्राह्मणः क्षत्त्रियविशां जीव्यवृत्ति समाश्रयेत् । स्ववृत्तेरुपहानित्वान्न श्ववृत्त्या कदाचन ॥४७॥
A Brāhmaṇa may, when necessary, adopt the occupations by which Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas sustain themselves, but never the livelihood of a dog-like or degrading occupation, since doing so would compromise his own proper livelihood. ॥४७॥

--- Page 6 ---

वर्णानां तु त्रिधा वृत्तिरुत्तमा मध्यमाऽधमा । ह्रासपुण्यफलांशस्य क्रमात्तद्धनदानतः ॥४८॥
The occupations of the different classes are of three kinds: superior, intermediate, and inferior. Accordingly, the merit derived from the wealth obtained through them decreases in that order. ॥४८॥

धनं चिकित्सासंबन्धि ग्रामयाचकगायिनाम् । कथं त्वयाचितमग्राह्यं पितृकर्मणि ॥४९॥
The wealth earned through medical treatment, begging in villages, or singing is not to be accepted for the performance of rites for the ancestors, even if it is offered without being solicited. ॥४९॥

चित्रकृन्नटवेश्यानां धारकारेक्षमर्दिनाम् । स्वस्त्या अपि न तद्ग्राह्यं धनं कथककूटयोः ॥५०॥
The wealth of painters, actors, courtesans, those who earn by carrying loads, those who crush or process materials, and those engaged in theatrical storytelling or deceitful performances should not be accepted for ancestral rites, even when offered willingly. ॥५०॥

मूल्यैश्चिकित्सां कुरुते कथां चित्रां तनोति यः । गीतं गायति भृत्यर्थं विप्रः सन्प्लवगो मतः ॥५१॥
A Brāhmaṇa who practices medicine for payment, performs dramatic storytelling for money, or sings for the sake of earning a livelihood is regarded as one who has abandoned the proper conduct expected of a Brāhmaṇa. ॥५१॥

युगधर्मेण वर्णानां धनं ग्राह्यं द्विजातिभिः । प्रकृतिना परिस्वस्त्या न्यायागतमथो यदि ॥५२॥
According to the Dharma appropriate to the particular age, wealth belonging to the different classes may be accepted by the twice-born, provided that it has been obtained naturally, properly, and through lawful means. ॥५२॥

सरित्समुद्रतोयैक्ये वापीकूपसरित्तटे । देवजुष्टे च संप्राप्ते देशे श्राद्धं गृहान्तरे ॥५३॥
Śrāddha should be performed at the confluence of a river and the sea, at the bank of a reservoir, well, or river, in a place sanctified by the gods, or within one's own house. ॥५३॥

धात्रीविल्ववटाश्वत्थमुनिचैत्यगजाविना । श्राद्धं छायासु कर्तव्यं प्रासादाद्रौ महावने ॥५४॥
Śrāddha should be performed in the shade of the dhātrī (āmalaka), bilva, banyan, aśvattha, sacred shrine, or elephant, as well as at temples, mountains, and great forests. ॥५४॥

न नाहं गृहमित्याहुर्गृहिणी गृहमुच्यते । गृहे तिष्ठति सा यावत्तावत्तीर्थसमं गृहम् ॥५५॥
A house is not merely called a house because of its structure; the wife is regarded as the true foundation of the household. As long as she remains in the house, that house is considered equivalent to a sacred place. ॥५५॥

पत्नी पाकं यदा कुर्यात्पुत्रः पुष्पकुशान् हरेत् । किं गयायां यदि श्राद्धं स्वकाले स्वगृहे भवेत् ॥५६॥
When the wife prepares the food and the son gathers the flowers and kuśa grass, what need is there to go to Gayā if the Śrāddha is performed at the proper time in one's own home? ॥५६॥

स्वगोत्रा सुभगा नारी भ्रातृभर्तृसुतान्विता । गुरुशुश्रूषणोपेता पित्रन्नं कर्तुमर्हति ॥५७॥
A fortunate woman belonging to the same lineage, who is accompanied by her brothers, husband, and sons and who is devoted to serving her elders and teachers, is qualified to prepare the food intended for the ancestors. ॥५७॥

आचार्यानी मातुलानी पितृमातृस्वसा स्वसा । एता ह्यविधवा कुर्युः पितृपाकं सुता स्तु पा ॥५८॥
The wife of the teacher, the maternal aunt, the paternal and maternal aunts, and one's own sister—if they are not widowed—may prepare the food for the ancestors; likewise, a daughter may perform this preparation. ॥५८॥

--- Page 7 ---


बहुप्रजास्तु या नार्यो भ्रातृवत्यः कुलोद्भवाः । पञ्चाशत्परितोऽब्दानां यदि वा विधवा अपि ॥५९॥
Women who have many children, who have brothers, who are born in a good family, who are around fifty years of age, or who are widows— ॥५९॥

पितृव्यभ्रातृजायाश्च मातरः पितृमातरः । कुर्युः सदा पैत्र्यं मृदुशीला च गोत्रिणी ॥६०॥
The wives of paternal uncles, mothers, and paternal grandmothers may always prepare the food for the ancestral rite, provided that they are gentle in disposition and belong to the proper lineage. ॥६०॥

सितार्द्रवाससा युक्ता मुक्तकेशा विकञ्चुकी । शिरोस्नाता व्याधिता स्त्री पाकं कुर्यान्न पैतृकम् ॥६१॥
A woman who is wearing a wet white garment, has loose hair, is without her upper garment, has bathed only her head, or is ill should not prepare food for the ancestors. ॥६१॥

भ्राता पितृव्यो भ्रातृव्यः स्त्रसृपुत्रः स्वयं पचेत् । पित्रन्नं च सुतः शिष्यो दौहित्रो दुहितुः पतिः ॥६२॥
A brother, paternal uncle, brother's son, sister's son, or oneself may prepare the food for the ancestors. A son, disciple, daughter's son, or daughter's husband may likewise prepare it. ॥६२॥

अक्रोधनैः शौचपरैरिति गाथामुदीरयन् । सायमामन्त्रयेद्विप्रान् श्राद्धे दैवे च कर्मणि ॥६३॥
Reciting the verse concerning those who are free from anger and devoted to purity, one should invite the Brāhmaṇas in the evening for the Śrāddha and the rites dedicated to the gods. ॥६३॥

निमन्त्रणं स्वयं दद्याद् माता शिष्यः सुता अपि । न स्त्रीबालैः स्वगोत्रीयैर्न ख्याप्यं न च दूरतः ॥६४॥
The invitation should be personally given by the mother, disciple, or son. It should not be announced through women, children, or members of one's own lineage, nor should the invitation be conveyed from a distance. ॥६४॥

दैवे वृद्धौ तीर्थकाम्यनदोत्पन्नैः समागते । न दुष्यति मनःस्थैर्यात्प्रातः सद्योनिमन्त्रणम् ॥६५॥
For rites connected with the gods, occasions of prosperity, sacred pilgrimages, desired purposes, or unexpected gatherings, an invitation given in the morning itself does not become defective, provided the mind remains steady and composed. ॥६५॥

प्रसाद्यतामितीत्युक्त्वा द्विस्त्रिर्देयं निमन्त्रणम् । यत्त्वीकृतं स्त्रिया सम्यक्सत्यं वितथमन्यथा ॥६६॥
Saying, “May you kindly accept,” the invitation should be given two or three times. If a woman properly accepts the invitation, it is considered binding; otherwise, it is regarded as void. ॥६६॥

यतीनामगृहस्थानां प्राघूर्णब्रह्मचारिणाम् । सर्वदानं मन्त्रणं बन्धुभृत्यबालसुहृत्त्रिया ॥६७॥
Ascetics, those who have no household, visiting Brahmacārins, and [certain] relatives, servants, children, friends, and women are to be invited according to the prescribed manner for the respective offerings. ॥६७॥

अदैवान्तरतः श्राद्धं दम्पत्यङ्गी वृथा भवेत् । निमन्त्रणं भवेद्यस्य लोभात्काकत्वमाप्नुयात् ॥६८॥
When a Śrāddha is performed without the proper divine component, the participation of the married couple becomes fruitless. One who accepts an invitation out of greed becomes like a crow. ॥६८॥

निमन्त्रणेऽप्रयातव्यं तं नियुक्तो लघुर्ब्रजेत् । सर्वदानलघोज्येष्ठौ वृथापाकी तु वा यतः ॥६९॥
One who has been invited should not fail to attend. The person appointed for the rite should go without delay, since otherwise the offering becomes diminished and the food prepared for the Śrāddha becomes fruitless. ॥६९॥

--- Page 8 ---
ब्राह्मणनिमन्त्रणम्, श्राद्धार्थं ब्राह्मणानां निरूपणम् ।

ब्रह्मकर्मरताः शान्ता अपापा अग्निसंश्रिताः । कर्मनिष्ठास्तपोनिष्ठा वेदार्थज्ञाः कुलोद्भवाः ॥७०॥
Brāhmaṇas who are devoted to Brahma-related duties, peaceful, free from sin, devoted to the sacred fires, steadfast in ritual duties and austerities, knowledgeable in the meaning of the Vedas, and born in a good lineage— ॥७०॥

मातृपितृपराश्चैव ब्राह्मवृत्त्युपजीविनः । अध्यापको ब्रह्मविदो ब्राह्मणाः श्राद्धसंपदि ॥७१॥
Those devoted to their mother and father, who live by the proper Brāhmaṇa livelihood, who teach, and who are knowers of Brahman—such Brāhmaṇas are suitable for the Śrāddha. ॥७१॥

स्वकीयशाखिनो मुख्याः श्राद्धे वेदविदां वर । पङ्क्तिपावनाः सर्वेषामेको वै सामविद्भवेत् ॥७२॥
O best among those learned in the Vedas, one's own Vedic-śākhā followers are foremost for Śrāddha. Among all the learned, a knower of the Sāma Veda is regarded as one who purifies the row of participants. ॥७२॥

गुरुश्वशुरजामातृदौहित्रभगिनीसुताः । आसनार्हाः पितृश्राद्धे योग्याः पूज्याश्च मातुलाः ॥७३॥
The teacher, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter's son, sister's son, and maternal uncle are worthy of a seat and are eligible and worthy of honor at the ancestral Śrāddha. ॥७३॥

भार्या रजस्वला यस्य हृता त्यक्ता दिवं गता । अश्राद्धार्हाः सर्वध्वास्य मृतानुकं गर्भदूषिता ॥७४॥
One whose wife was menstruating, abducted, abandoned, or has departed this world, and one whose wife died after a pregnancy-related impurity, is not considered eligible for participation in Śrāddha. ॥७४॥

योऽभार्यः सन्बलं चेतः संयम्याविधुरो भवेत् । क्रियापरः श्रुतेर्वेत्ता श्राद्धे वै भोजयेत्पितुः ॥७५॥
A man without a wife who remains self-controlled and steadfast, who is devoted to religious rites and knowledgeable in revealed scripture, may be invited to eat at his father's Śrāddha. ॥७५॥

श्रुतिज्ञं कुलजं शान्तं प्रजावन्तं जितेन्द्रियम् । मृतभार्यमपि श्राद्धे भोजयेदविशङ्कितः ॥७६॥
A man who knows the Vedas, is of good lineage, peaceful, has children, and has conquered his senses may be fed at the Śrāddha even if his wife has died; there should be no hesitation in doing so. ॥७६॥

अप्रजो मृतपत्नीकः सर्वकर्मसु गर्हितः । छन्दो विनाऽपि न स्थेयं दिनमेकं विनाऽऽश्रमम् ॥७७॥
A man who is childless and whose wife has died is regarded as unsuitable for all such rites. One should not remain even for a single day without an āśrama or an appropriate stage of life, even without the prescribed Vedic chant. ॥७७॥

यस्य पुत्राः सदाचाराः श्रुतिज्ञा धर्मसंमुखाः । पितृभक्तिरता दान्ता न वैधव्यं मृतस्त्रियि ॥७८॥
For a man whose sons are of good conduct, learned in scripture, devoted to Dharma, devoted to their father, and self-controlled, the death of his wife does not render him disqualified. ॥७८॥

तुरीये धाम्नि यस्तिष्ठेत्संधौ मध्यनिशि क्षणम् । अनार्योऽप्यनपत्योऽपि श्राद्धपुण्यैरवाप्यते ॥७९॥
One who remains for even a moment at the fourth sacred station at the junction in the middle of the night—even if he is regarded as unworthy or is childless—may attain [benefit] through the merit of Śrāddha. ॥७९॥

षोडशाब्दात्परं श्राद्धे विप्राणां सप्तसप्तकैः । भोजयेत्पितृकार्यार्थे ततोऽन्यान्देवकर्मणि ॥८०॥
For a Śrāddha performed after the sixteenth year, one should feed seven groups of seven Brāhmaṇas for the sake of the ancestors, and thereafter feed others for the rites dedicated to the gods. ॥८०॥

--- Page 9 ---

न पुत्रपुत्री तदपत्यभार्या न बन्धुरङ्गीकृतचित्तधारणम् । संप्राप्य वैधव्यं अनङ्गसंभवो यस्तिष्ठति व्यक्ततया स वर्ज्यः ॥८१॥
One who has neither son nor daughter, nor a spouse who has borne children, nor a relative who has accepted responsibility for him, and who, having become widowed, remains openly without marital relations, is to be avoided. ॥८१॥

रोगी हीनातिरक्ताङ्गः काणः पौनर्भवस्तथा । अवकीर्णी कुण्डगोलौ कुनखो श्यावदन्तकः ॥८२॥
A diseased person, one whose limbs are deficient or excessively developed, a one-eyed person, one born from a remarried woman, one who has violated the prescribed student discipline, a Kuṇḍa, a Gola, one with deformed nails, and one with dark or discolored teeth— ॥८२॥

भृतकाध्यापकः कुष्ठी कन्यादूष्यभिशस्तकः । फ्लीबान्धमूकबधिराः कुजशी वृषलीपतिः ॥८३॥
A teacher who teaches for wages, a person afflicted with leprosy, one accused of violating a maiden, an impotent person, a blind person, a mute person, a deaf person, one with malformed nails, and the husband of a Vṛṣalī— ॥८३॥

परपूर्वापतिः स्तेनः कदुष्टश्च निन्दितः । भोक्तारः षोडशे यस्य ते वर्ज्या द्रव्यलोभतः ॥८४॥
A man who has married a woman previously married to another, a thief, a morally corrupt or censured person, and those who partake in the sixteenth [type of disqualified conduct] are to be avoided, particularly because of greed for wealth. ॥८४॥

वृषोत्सर्गस्य कर्तारो वर्जनीयाः सदैव हि । पितुर्गृहेषु या कन्या रजः पश्यत्यसंस्कृता ॥८५॥
Those who perform the rite of releasing a bull are always to be avoided. A maiden who experiences menstruation in her father's house without having undergone the prescribed rites— ॥८५॥

सा कन्या वृषली ज्ञेया तत्पतिर्वृषलीपतिः । महीयोत्युच्यते भार्या सा चैव व्यभिचारिणी ॥८६॥
Such a maiden is known as a Vṛṣalī, and her husband is called a Vṛṣalīpati. A wife who engages in adultery is likewise designated by a term of reproach. ॥८६॥

तान्दोषान्क्षमते यस्तु स वै माहिषकः स्मृतः । अज्ञानादथ वा लोभान्मोहाद्वाऽपि विशेषतः ॥८७॥
One who overlooks or tolerates these faults is called a Māhiṣaka, whether he does so out of ignorance, greed, delusion, or especially for some other motive. ॥८७॥

समघ योऽन्नमादाय महार्घं तु प्रयच्छति । स वै वाधुषिको नाम अनर्हः सर्वकर्मसु ॥८८॥
One who takes ordinary food and gives it in return at an excessively high price is called a Vādhuṣika and is considered unfit for all religious rites. ॥८८॥

वृषोत्सर्गस्य कर्तारं यदि पश्यन्ति पूर्वजाः । रौरवं नरकं यान्ति कुम्भीपाकं सुदारुणम् ॥८९॥
If the ancestors see one who has performed the Vṛṣotsarga rite, they are said to fall into the terrible hells called Raurava and Kumbhīpāka. ॥८९॥

कालालकं वाधुषिकं मध्ये च वृषलीपतिम् । श्राद्धे माहिषकं दृष्ट्वा निराशा यान्ति पूर्वजाः ॥९०॥
Upon seeing at a Śrāddha a Kālālaka, a Vādhuṣika, a Vṛṣalīpati, or a Māhiṣaka, the ancestors are said to depart disappointed and without receiving satisfaction. ॥९०॥

यो लोभादसवर्णानामाद्यश्राद्धान्यनुक्रमात् । स षोडशकं वृषोत्सर्गं कुर्यात्कालालकः स्मृतः ॥९१॥
One who, out of greed, performs the initial Śrāddha rites for persons of different social classes in succession is regarded as a Kālālaka; he should perform the sixteenfold Vṛṣotsarga rite. ॥९१॥

--- Page 10 ---


अथ श्राद्धनियमानाह —

दन्तधावनताम्बूलं स्निग्धस्नानमभोजनम् । दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः श्राद्धभुगष्ट वर्जयेत् ॥९२॥
The performer who partakes of the Śrāddha should abstain from eight things: brushing the teeth, chewing betel, an oily bath, eating [apart from the prescribed Śrāddha meal], giving gifts, accepting gifts, and performing a homa. ॥९२॥

श्राद्धनिमन्त्रितो विप्रो वर्जयेत्स्त्रीनिषेवणम् । पूर्वद्युश्च परेद्युश्च वर्जयेद्भोजनद्वयम् ॥९३॥
A Brāhmaṇa invited to a Śrāddha should abstain from sexual relations with women. He should also avoid taking two meals on both the preceding and following days. ॥९३॥

नीचसंभाषणं याज्यं दिवानिद्रां प्रतिग्रहम् । श्रौचमुष्णोदकैः स्नानं वर्जयेच्छ्राद्धकृत् ध्रुवम् ॥९४॥
The performer of the Śrāddha should certainly avoid conversation with those regarded as low, officiating for others, sleeping during the day, accepting gifts, excessive bodily adornment, and bathing with hot water. ॥९४॥

न च सीमान्तरं गच्छन्न श्मशानं जिनालयम् । श्राद्धकृत्सर्वदा पश्येन्नोदक्यां श्वपचं शवम् ॥९५॥
The performer of the Śrāddha should not cross the boundary of the prescribed area, nor should he visit a cremation ground or a Jina temple. He should never look upon a menstruating woman, a person regarded as a Śvapaca, or a corpse. ॥९५॥

श्रीखण्डं दर्भसूत्रं यवतिलतुलसीशतपत्रं कर्ता धूपं दीपोदपात्रं कुसुम्भं फलजात्यं पत्रभूम्भोमयानि । श्रीशः शाल्वे च पात्रो द्विजमधुसकृदाच्छिन्नहेमार्घपात्राण्यन्नं श्राद्धोपहारः सुतगृहगृहिणीशुभ्वासांसि कालः ॥९६॥
Sandalwood, darbha grass, sacred threads, barley, sesame, tulasī, lotuses, incense, lamps, vessels for water, flowers, fruits, leaves, and earthen vessels are among the articles prescribed for Śrāddha. The vessels, food offerings, auspicious garments, the household, the son, and the wife are likewise mentioned among the appropriate requisites and circumstances for the rite. ॥९६॥

श्रीखण्डमर्चयेच्छ्रेष्ठं सकर्पूरं सकेसरम् । पूर्वजानां तु देवानां नान्यन्मलयजादिकम् ॥९७॥
The finest sandalwood should be offered, together with camphor and saffron. For the ancestors, sandalwood and similar substances from the Malaya region should be used rather than other materials. ॥९७॥

मन्त्रपूता हरिद्वर्णाः प्रातर्विप्रसमुद्धृताः । गोकर्णमात्रा दर्भाः स्युः पवित्राः पुण्यभूमिजाः ॥९८॥
The darbha grass should be purified by mantras, yellowish in color, gathered in the morning by a Brāhmaṇa, of the measure of a cow's ear, and obtained from a sacred and pure place. ॥९८॥

शुक्लः कृष्णः कृष्णतरश्चतुर्थो जर्तिलस्तिलः । उत्तरोत्तरतः श्राद्धे पितृणां तृप्तिकारकाः ॥९९॥
Sesame is of four kinds: white, black, very dark, and the fourth called Jartila. In the Śrāddha, each successive variety is regarded as increasingly effective in bringing satisfaction to the ancestors. ॥९९॥

तुलस्यः सर्वदेवानां समञ्जर्यः शुभावहाः । पूर्वजानां यथा प्राप्ता सैकोद्दिष्टे विमञ्जरी ॥१००॥
Tulasī with its clusters of blossoms is auspicious for all the gods. For the ancestors, it should be used according to what is prescribed; in the Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha, it is used without the flower cluster. ॥१००॥

--- Page 11 ---

अगस्त्यं भृङ्गिराजं च तुलसीं शतपत्रिकाम् । तिलं च तिलपुष्पं च षडेते पितृवल्लभाः ॥१०१॥
Agastya, Bhṛṅgirāja, tulasī, the hundred-petalled lotus, sesame, and the sesame flower—these six are beloved of the ancestors. ॥१०१॥

त्रिगुणं सूत्रमादद्याद् प्रतिपिण्डं नवोद्गतम् । सामगानां तु संलग्नं सर्वेषामेकतन्तुना ॥१०२॥
For each newly prepared piṇḍa, one should take a three-stranded sacred thread. For Sāmaveda practitioners, the prescribed thread is attached; for all others, a single strand is used. ॥१०२॥

धूपो गुग्गुलुना कार्यो दीपस्तैलघृतेन तु । तुलसीशतपत्राभ्यां पूजनं पितृवल्लभम् ॥१०३॥
Incense should be made with guggulu, while the lamp should be fueled with oil or ghee. Worship with tulasī and the hundred-petalled lotus is especially pleasing to the ancestors. ॥१०३॥

चम्पको दमनः कुन्दः कल्हारो वीरोऽथ केतवः । जातिदर्शनमात्रेण निराशा यान्ति पूर्वजाः ॥१०४॥
Champaka, Damana, Kunda, Kalhāra, Vīra, and Ketava flowers—upon merely seeing these, the ancestors are said to become disappointed. ॥१०४॥

अनन्तर्गर्भिणं सायं कौशं द्विदलमेव च । प्रादेशमात्रं सर्वत्र पवित्रं सर्वकर्मसु ॥१०५॥
A kuśa blade without an internal germ, an evening-gathered kuśa, and a two-leaved blade are mentioned here; a piece measuring one pradeśa is regarded as pure for all rites. ॥१०५॥

वासश्चतुर्विधं प्रोक्तं त्वक्सूत्रं कृमिरोमजम् । उत्तरोत्तरतः श्रेष्ठं प्रक्षाल्यं श्राद्धकर्मणि ॥१०६॥
Four kinds of cloth are described: made from bark, thread, material produced from worms, and material produced from hair. Each successive kind is regarded as superior to the preceding one and should be washed before use in Śrāddha rites. ॥१०६॥

धौतं सप्ताष्टहस्तैः स्यादुत्तरीयं तदर्धकम् । वाससी सर्वदा चार्ये दग्धरूक्ष्यादिवर्जिते ॥१०७॥
The washed cloth should measure seven or eight hastas, while the upper garment should be half that length. The garments should always be free from burning, excessive dryness, and similar defects. ॥१०७॥

त्यजेत्पर्युषितं पुष्पं त्यजेत्पर्युषितं जलम् । न त्यजेज्जाह्नवीतोयं तुलसीदलपङ्कजम् ॥१०८॥
Withered flowers should be discarded, and stale water should likewise be discarded. But water from the Ganges, tulasī leaves, and lotuses should not be rejected on account of age. ॥१०८॥

गोमयेनोपलिप्ता भूः पवित्रा सर्वकर्मसु । गोमूत्रेणोक्षिता तीर्थे विष्णुपादाम्बुसेविता ॥१०९॥
Ground smeared with cow dung is considered pure for all rites. In a sacred place, ground sprinkled with cow urine and sanctified by water associated with the feet of Viṣṇu is likewise considered pure. ॥१०९॥

पात्राण्यर्ह्याणि खाङ्गानि हेमरूप्यमृदामपि । औदुम्बराणि पर्णानि देवतार्थोद्भवानि च ॥११०॥
The prescribed vessels may be made of various suitable materials, including gold, silver, clay, and sacred wood such as udumbara; leaves and vessels appropriate for divine worship are also mentioned. ॥११०॥

हेमरूप्यमये पात्रे पिण्डत्रयं विनिक्षिपेत् । शौल्वे कांस्ये खाङ्गपात्रे न च मृण्मयकाष्ठजे ॥१११॥
The three piṇḍas should be placed in vessels made of gold or silver. They should not be placed in vessels made of bronze, bell-metal, ordinary clay, or wood. ॥१११॥

--- Page 12 ---

पाकपात्राणि शौल्वानि सर्वधातुमयानि वा । सर्वेभ्यो मृण्मयं श्रेष्ठमग्निपूतजलाप्लुतम् ॥११२॥
Cooking vessels should be made of bronze or of other metals. Among them all, an earthen vessel is considered superior, provided it has been purified by fire and filled or washed with water. ॥११२॥

लोहपात्रेषु यत्पक्वं तदन्नं काकमांसवत् । भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं कुर्याच्छ्राद्धे नान्येषु कर्मसु ॥११३॥
Food cooked in iron vessels is regarded as being like crow's meat. If it is eaten at a Śrāddha, one should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa penance; this rule does not apply to other rites. ॥११३॥

ताम्रपाने न गोक्षीरं पचेदन्नं न लोहजे । क्रमेण घृततैलाक्ते ताम्रलोहे न दुष्यतः ॥११४॥
Cow's milk should not be cooked in a copper vessel, nor should food be cooked in an iron vessel. However, when copper or iron vessels are appropriately smeared with ghee or oil, they are not considered impure in the prescribed manner. ॥११४॥

रौप्यहैमानि पात्राणि नव्यसौराष्ट्रजानि वा । पत्रावल्यः पवित्राः स्युर्विप्राणां श्राद्धभोजने ॥११५॥
Vessels made of silver or gold, or newly made vessels from Saurāṣṭra, are considered pure. Leaf plates are also regarded as pure for the feeding of Brāhmaṇas at Śrāddha. ॥११५॥

कांस्यखर्परशुक्राश्ममृत्काष्ठफललोहजैः । नाचामेद्वैकृतैः पाशैः श्राद्धे वै चर्मवारिणा ॥११६॥
At a Śrāddha, one should not perform ācamana using vessels made of bronze, potsherd, crystal, stone, clay, wood, fruit-shell, or iron, nor with impure or unsuitable vessels, or with water contained in leather. ॥११६॥

औदुम्बरेण पात्रेण कुर्यादाचमनक्रियाम् । तारताम्रसुवर्णांशैर्मिश्रधातुसमुद्भवैः ॥११७॥
The act of ācamana should be performed using an udumbara vessel, or vessels made from suitable combinations of silver, copper, gold, or mixed metals. ॥११७॥

कांस्यपात्राच्च्युतं वारि स्नाने च देवतार्चने । श्वानमूत्रसमं तोयं पुनः स्नानेन शुध्यति ॥११८॥
Water that has fallen from a bronze vessel during bathing or worship of the deities is regarded as being equivalent to dog urine. Purification is accomplished by bathing again. ॥११८॥

नीवारा माषमुद्गाश्च गोधूमाः शालयस्तथा । यवाश्च चणकाश्चैव श्राद्धभक्ष्यास्तथा तिलाः ॥११९॥
Wild rice, black gram, green gram, wheat, rice, barley, chickpeas, and sesame are among the foods permitted at Śrāddha. ॥११९॥

कदलीकन्दफलकं धात्री बिल्वी च तूलकाः । कारकद्रोणपुष्पी च तण्डुली चक्रवर्तिका ॥१२०॥
Banana root and fruit, āmalakī, bilva, tūlaka, kāraka, droṇa flowers, taṇḍulī, and cakravartikā are also mentioned among the acceptable foods. ॥१२०॥

उपोदकी चर्मफलं कोशातक्याः फलं शमी । जीवन्ती तुण्डिका अम्लीका कालशाकस्तथाऽऽर्द्रकम् ॥१२१॥
Upodakī, the fruit of the carma plant, the fruit of kośātakī, śamī, jīvantī, tuṇḍikā, amlīkā, kālaśāka, and ginger are likewise prescribed. ॥१२१॥

उर्वारुक्षीरिणीपीलुद्राक्षाम्रकदलीफलम् । बीजपूरं कलिम्बुनि चिर्भदं जानि चिर्भटम् ॥१२२॥
Urvaru, kṣīriṇī, pīlu, grapes, mango, banana fruit, bījapūra, kalimbu, and the fruits known as cirbhaṭa and related varieties are also included among the prescribed foods. ॥१२२॥

--- Page 13 ---

कर्कोटकं कारवेल्लं सूरागं सृष्टपिण्डिकाः । कोटिभष्टं तत्त्रिविधं निशाचिह्नी च वासुकः ॥१२३॥
Karkoṭaka, bitter gourd, Sūrāga, Sṛṣṭapiṇḍikā, the three varieties of Koṭibhaṣṭa, Niśācihnī, and Vāsuka are [among the foods mentioned in the text]. ॥१२३॥

मरीचं हिङ्गु तैलानि सद्रव्याण्यविदाहि च । श्राद्धेष्वेतानि मुख्यानि तथा लवणजीरकैः ॥१२४॥
Black pepper, asafoetida, oils, wholesome ingredients, and non-irritating foods are considered important for Śrāddha, along with salt and cumin. ॥१२४॥

गवां क्षीरं दधि घृतं क्षौद्रभिक्षुरसं तथा । शर्करा गुडमत्स्यण्डी तथा मृष्टफलानि च ॥१२५॥
Cow's milk, curd, ghee, honey, sugarcane juice, sugar, jaggery, Matsyaṇḍī [a preparation of sugar], and excellent fruits are [prescribed]. ॥१२५॥

श्यामाकान्कोद्रवान्कङ्गुन्कलञ्जान्राजमाषकान् । निष्पावकान्कम्बानि वर्जयेच्छ्राद्धकर्मणि ॥१२६॥
Śyāmāka, Kodrava, Kaṅgu, Kalañja, Rājamāṣa, Niṣpāva, Kamba, and similar foods should be avoided in Śrāddha rites. ॥१२६॥

कलिङ्गं चैव वृन्ताकं कूष्माण्डं रक्तनीलकम् । हस्तीमुण्डफलं मर्ज्यमलाबु च तुषाम्रकम् ॥१२७॥
Kaliṅga, eggplant, pumpkin, the red and blue varieties, Hastimunda fruit, Marjya, Alābu, and Tuṣāmra should be avoided. ॥१२७॥

करीरजं कुमारीजं सार्षपं राजिकोद्भवम् । वर्जयेत्पितृकार्येषु वल्लकौसुम्भपर्परौ ॥१२८॥
The products of Karīra and Kumārī, mustard and Rājikā, along with Vallaka, Kusumbha, and Parpara, should be avoided in rites performed for the ancestors. ॥१२८॥

क्षीरं दधि घृतं तक्रमविच्छागसमुद्भवम् । माहिषं च दधि क्षीरं श्राद्धे वर्ज्यं प्रयत्नतः ॥१२९॥
Milk, curd, ghee, buttermilk, and products obtained from sheep or goats, as well as buffalo curd and buffalo milk, should carefully be avoided at Śrāddha. ॥१२९॥

माहिषं मृतवत्सागोः सूतिकागोश्च वर्जयेत् ॥१३०॥
Milk obtained from a buffalo whose calf has died, and milk from a cow that has recently given birth, should be avoided. ॥१३०॥

मिश्रितं धेनुपयसा सापत्यमहिषीपयः । मेध्यमभ्युक्षितं गाह्यं तद्गायत्र्या सर्वकर्मसु ॥१३१॥
Milk of a buffalo accompanied by its calf, when mixed with cow's milk and ritually purified by sprinkling, is regarded as fit for use; it should be sanctified with the Gāyatrī mantra for ritual purposes. ॥१३१॥

क्षीरं कठिनपक्वं स्याद् याघसं स्याद्विलेपकम् । पीशीरं द्रवरूपं तत्क्षीरे त्रिविधा मता ॥१३२॥
Milk is considered to have three forms according to its preparation: when cooked until firm, when reduced to a thick paste, and when it remains in a liquid form. ॥१३२॥

पितृमानवदेवानां पायसीक्षीरपायसैः । जायते परमा तृप्तिः समध्वाज्यैः सशर्करैः ॥१३३॥
The ancestors, human beings, and gods attain supreme satisfaction through milk and milk-puddings, especially when prepared with honey, ghee, and sugar. ॥१३३॥

--- Page 14 ---

पायसं शूद्रतो ग्राह्यं यद्यम्बुरहितं भवेत् । नव्यमृत्पात्रपक्वं चेत्पित्रर्थेऽपि न दुष्यति ॥१३४॥
Rice pudding (pāyasa) may be accepted from a Śūdra if it is prepared without water. If it has been cooked in a new earthen vessel, it is not considered impure even when prepared for the ancestors. ॥१३४॥

पायसं सक्तवो धाना तिलपिष्टं तथौषधम् । साम्बून्येतानि गृह्णीयादपि शूद्रान्न दुष्यति ॥१३५॥
Pāyasa, saktu, roasted grains, sesame flour, medicinal preparations, and Sāmbū are among the foods that may be accepted; even when obtained from a Śūdra, they are not considered impure. ॥१३५॥

क्रीतं विप्रघृतं नीत्वा यदि विप्रांश्च भोजयेत् । दाता भोक्ता च विक्रेता पूर्वजाश्च पतन्ति ते ॥१३६॥
If someone purchases ghee from a Brāhmaṇa and then uses it to feed Brāhmaṇas, the giver, the eater, the seller, and their ancestors are all said to fall. ॥१३६॥

लावण्यतित्तिरिशकुन्तकपिञ्जलानां भारण्डसारसमयूर्वकीरकाणाम् । धूम्यारकारिकुटरीदहनाटभारद्वाजाख्यलाटशिकुररीकिकिदीविकानाम् ॥१३७॥
The text lists various kinds of birds, including Lāvaṇya, Tittiri, Śakunta, Piñjala, Bhāraṇḍa, Sārasa, Mayūra, and Kīraka, as well as Dhūmyāraka, Kuṭarī, Dahanāṭa, Bhāradvāja, Lāṭa, Śikurī, Kikidī, and other varieties. ॥१३७॥

सारङ्गशम्बरवराहककृष्णसारशशसानि दुर्लभतमानि सदा पितॄणाम् ॥१३८॥
Sāraṅga, Śambara, boar, Kṛṣṇasāra, and hare are described as especially rare and highly valued for the ancestors. ॥१३८॥

खङ्गमांसैः यदा पिण्डान् कुर्याद्वा भोजयेद्द्विजान् । तदा भवति पूर्वेषां तृप्तिर्द्वादशवार्षिकी ॥१३९॥
When piṇḍas are prepared from rhinoceros meat, or Brāhmaṇas are fed with it, the ancestors are said to obtain satisfaction lasting for twelve years. ॥१३९॥

खड्गास्थि यदि विद्येत श्राद्धकाले समीपगम् । गयाश्राद्धं न सा तृप्तिः पितॄणां सा भवेत्तदा ॥१४०॥
If the bone of a rhinoceros is present near the place of the Śrāddha, the satisfaction of the ancestors is said to be equivalent to that obtained through a Gayā Śrāddha. ॥१४०॥

कथयन्तीति पितरः कुले कश्चिद्भविष्यति । यः खड्गमांसपिण्डांश्च कुर्याद्वा पितृभोजनम् ॥१४१॥
The ancestors are said to declare: “May there be someone in our lineage who will prepare piṇḍas of rhinoceros meat or offer it as food to the ancestors.” ॥१४१॥

कूर्चलो विलमण्डश्च गोधा ककृपजाहकः । पञ्च पञ्चनखा ह्येते दुर्लभाः श्राद्धकर्मणि ॥१४२॥
Kūrcala, Vilamaṇḍa, the monitor lizard, and Kakṛpajāhaka are mentioned among the five-clawed creatures that are considered rare and suitable for Śrāddha. ॥१४२॥

व्याघ्रेभ्यो मेध्यमांसानि ग्राह्याणि द्रव्यपर्ययैः । पित्रर्थं स्वगृहे हिंसन् खादन्मांसं न पापभाक् ॥१४३॥
Suitable meat from animals such as the tiger may be obtained in exchange for other substances. If a person hunts and eats meat in his own house specifically for the sake of his ancestors, he is not considered to incur sin. ॥१४३॥

--- Page 15 ---

विना श्राद्धं विना यज्ञं मधुपर्कविधिं विना । पापी स्यात्स्वार्थतः कुर्वन् जीवघातं बलिं विना ॥१४४॥
Without Śrāddha, without sacrifice, and without the prescribed Madhūparka rite, one becomes sinful if one kills a living being for one's own selfish purpose rather than as an offering. ॥१४४॥

न जीवेन विना तृप्तिर्जीवस्यापि हि सर्वदा । अतः ससर्ज भगवाञ्जीवो जीवेन हिंस्यते ॥१४५॥
No living being can always obtain satisfaction without another living being. Therefore, the Lord created living beings in such a manner that one living being becomes the food of another. ॥१४५॥

प्रवृत्तिर्वचनात्कुर्वन्निवृत्तिरपि कर्मणाम् । एवं व्यवहरेन्नित्यं गृहस्थोऽपि हि मुच्यते ॥१४६॥
By acting according to the prescribed injunctions and by also abstaining from prohibited actions, a householder who conducts himself in this manner can attain liberation. ॥१४६॥

न प्रवृत्तेः पुण्यहानिस्तन्निवृत्तेर्महत्फलम् । तदा दातव्यं धर्मज्ञैर्धर्मकारुण्यसंश्रयैः ॥१४७॥
There is no loss of religious merit through properly prescribed action, while great merit arises from abstaining from harmful action. Therefore, those who understand Dharma and are established in compassion should give accordingly. ॥१४७॥

कारुण्यं प्राणिषु प्रायः कर्तव्यं पुण्यहेतवे । अहिंसा परमो धर्मस्तस्मादात्मवदाचरेत् ॥१४८॥
Compassion toward living beings should generally be practiced as a means of attaining merit. Non-violence is the highest Dharma; therefore, one should behave toward living beings as one would toward oneself. ॥१४८॥

यज्ञेषु पशुहिंसायां सावर्णिव्यवसायवत् । फलं सहस्रगुणितं हिंस्यो राजा भवेदनु ॥१४९॥
In the killing of animals during sacrifices, according to the prescribed ritual undertaking, the result is said to be multiplied a thousandfold; the one who performs the prescribed killing becomes [the recipient of] that result. ॥१४९॥

कारुण्यात्सर्वभूतेषु आत्मवन्तः सतां सताम् । उक्तकर्मसु सर्वत्र तदा मांसनिषेधनम् ॥१५०॥
Because of compassion toward all beings, the virtuous and self-controlled have prescribed the prohibition of meat in all the rites mentioned above. ॥१५०॥

मद्यमप्यनृतं श्राद्धे कलौ तत्तु विवर्जयेत् । मांसान्यपि हि सर्वाणि युगधर्मक्रमाद्भवेत् ॥१५१॥
Even though the use of intoxicating drink may have been prescribed in Śrāddha, it should be abandoned in the Kali age. Likewise, all kinds of meat should be avoided according to the Dharma appropriate to the age. ॥१५१॥

अतो माषान्नमेवैतन्मांसार्थं ब्रह्मणा कृतम् । पितरस्तेन तृप्यन्ति श्राद्धं कुर्यान्न तद्विना ॥१५२॥
Therefore, Brahmā created the preparation of Māṣa [black gram] as a substitute for meat. The ancestors are satisfied by it; thus Śrāddha should be performed with it. ॥१५२॥

यथा बलिष्ठं मांसत्वान्माषान्नमपि तत्समम् । सौगन्धिकं च स्वादिष्ठं मधुरं द्रव्यभेदतः ॥१५३॥
Just as meat is considered nourishing because of its strength-giving quality, the Māṣa preparation is likewise considered equivalent to it. Sugandhika is also delicious and sweet, differing according to the particular ingredients used. ॥१५३॥

भक्ष्यं भक्ष्यविधौ यत्तु गर्हितं तद्विवर्जयेत् । अभक्ष्यमपि भक्ष्यं स्याद्देशधर्मेण वै मुने ॥१५४॥
Whatever is prescribed as objectionable under the rules governing food should be avoided. Yet, O sage, something ordinarily regarded as inedible may become acceptable according to the customs and Dharma of a particular region. ॥१५४॥

--- Page 16 ---

अथ शब्दस्तु रविभागे जव्यान्ते राजवर्जिते । वाजं देयं प्रयत्नेन कथिभ्यो वज्रमिश्रितम् ॥१५५॥
[The opening wording of this verse is unclear in the manuscript.] One should carefully give the prescribed offering to those who request it, mixed with the appropriate substance. ॥१५५॥

त्रिमुहूर्तस्तु प्रातः स्यात्तावानेव तु सङ्गवः । मध्याह्नस्त्रिमुहूर्तः स्यादपराह्नस्तथैव च ॥१५६॥
The morning period consists of three muhūrtas; the Saṅgava period is likewise three muhūrtas. Midday consists of three muhūrtas, and the afternoon likewise consists of three. ॥१५६॥

सायं तु त्रिमुहूर्तः स्यात्पञ्चधा काल उच्यते । अतोऽपराह्नः पूर्वेषां भोज्यकाल उदाहृतः ॥१५७॥
Evening consists of three muhūrtas; thus the day is said to be divided into five periods. Therefore, the afternoon is declared to be the proper time for the ancestors' meal. ॥१५७॥

आरम्भं कुतपे कुर्याद्रौहिणं तु न लङ्घयेत् । एतत्पञ्चमुहूर्तान्तः श्राद्धकाल उदाहृतः ॥१५८॥
The Śrāddha should be begun during the Kutapa period, and the Rauhiṇa period should not be passed over. This entire period extending over five muhūrtas is declared to be the proper time for Śrāddha. ॥१५८॥

मुहूर्तास्तत्र विज्ञेया दश पञ्च च सर्वदा । तत्राष्टमो मुहूर्तो यः स कालः कुतपः स्मृतः ॥१५९॥
There are always fifteen muhūrtas to be understood in this reckoning. The eighth muhūrta among them is known as the Kutapa period. ॥१५९॥

विवृद्धा यत्र पुरतः कुतपस्पर्शिनी तिथिः । श्राद्धसांवत्सराङ्क च निर्णयोऽयं कृतः सदा ॥१६०॥
When the tithi extends forward and touches the Kutapa period, this rule is used for determining the annual Śrāddha. ॥१६०॥

आषाढ्याः पञ्चमे पक्षे यान्यहानि तु षोडश । क्रतुभिस्तानि तुल्यानि तेषु दत्तं महाफलम् ॥१६१॥
The sixteen days belonging to the fifth fortnight of Āṣāḍha are considered equivalent to sacrifices. Offerings made on those days yield great merit. ॥१६१॥

चतुर्दश्यां समारम्भः पौर्णमासादि पार्वणः । प्रातरन्तमजस्रं स्यादस्यान्तः पार्वणो विधिः ॥१६२॥
The Pārvaṇa Śrāddha beginning on the fourteenth day extends through the full-moon observance; it continues until the morning, and this is the prescribed conclusion of the Pārvaṇa rite. ॥१६२॥

ब्राह्मान्मुहूर्तादारभ्य कुर्यान्मासार्थयामतः । श्राद्धं महालयं नाम तत्तु तीर्थवदाचरेत् ॥१६३॥
Beginning from the Brāhma muhūrta, one should perform the rite through the prescribed period of the month. This is called Mahālaya Śrāddha, and it should be performed with the same reverence as a sacred pilgrimage rite. ॥१६३॥

पक्षेऽपरे च भरणी महती सा प्रकीर्तिता । तस्यां श्राद्धं प्रकुर्वीत गयाश्राद्धसमं फलम् ॥१६४॥
In the latter fortnight, the Bharaṇī day is renowned as especially significant. Śrāddha performed on that day is said to yield a result equal to Śrāddha performed at Gayā. ॥१६४॥

नन्दायां भार्गवदिने माघासु च युगादिषु । पिण्डपातं प्रकुर्वीत ज्येष्ठपुत्रो विनश्यति ॥१६५॥
One should offer the piṇḍas on a Nandā tithi, on a Friday, during the Māghā [period], and on the Yuga-origin days. [The manuscript's final clause is difficult/possibly corrupt; literally it states:] “the eldest son perishes.” ॥१६५॥

--- Page 17 ---

पौर्णमास्यादिसंयोगे योऽधिकुर्यान्महालयम् । पिण्डदाननिषिद्धेऽपि न निषिद्धं कदाचन ॥१६६॥
When Mahālaya coincides with the full moon and other such occasions, it should be performed even if piṇḍa offering is otherwise prohibited; in such a circumstance, the piṇḍa offering is never considered prohibited. ॥१६६॥

महालये त्रयोदश्यां भवेद्यदि पितुर्दिनम् । पिण्डदानं विप्रभोज्यं श्राद्धं तत्स्याद्गयासमम् ॥१६७॥
If the father's death anniversary falls on the thirteenth day during Mahālaya, piṇḍa offering and feeding Brāhmaṇas should be performed; such Śrāddha is said to be equal in merit to Śrāddha performed at Gayā. ॥१६७॥

पक्षश्राद्धं वा पञ्चमीप्रभृति स्यान्महालये । पितुः पितामहस्याप्य प्रपितामहमृद्दिने ॥१६८॥
During Mahālaya, beginning from the fifth lunar day, Pakṣa Śrāddha may be performed on the respective death days of one's father, grandfather, and great-grandfather. ॥१६८॥

कालो ह्यनन्तरूपस्तु कालो वै परमेश्वरः । तस्मात्काले प्रसन्नेन कर्तव्यं कर्म निश्चितम् ॥१६९॥
Time has infinite forms; indeed, Time itself is the Supreme Lord. Therefore, the prescribed rite should certainly be performed at the proper time, with a composed and devoted mind. ॥१६९॥

गर्भस्थोऽपि च दौहित्रोऽश्वयुक्प्रतिपद्दिने । कुर्यान्मातामहश्राद्धं पितरौ यदि जीवतः ॥१७०॥
Even a daughter's son who is still in the womb is [here textually stated to be connected with] the Śrāddha of his maternal grandfather on the Pratipadā of Āśvina, provided his parents are alive. ॥१७०॥

आश्वप्रतिपदि श्राद्धं नन्दीश्राद्धवदिष्यते । नात्यन्तपाकशुद्धिः स्यादामध्याह्नाद्विशिष्यते ॥१७१॥
Śrāddha performed on the Āśvina Pratipadā is regarded as similar to Nandī Śrāddha. The text indicates that complete purity of the cooking is not required in the same manner, and the period extending up to midday is especially significant. ॥१७१॥

सूतकादिनिमित्तेन द्रव्याभावादिभेदतः । स्थितं महालयं कुर्याद्यावद्वृश्चिकदर्शनम् ॥१७२॥
Because of impurity arising from events such as childbirth or death, or because of lack of the necessary materials, the Mahālaya rite may be performed later, up to the time when the Sun enters Scorpio (Vṛścika). ॥१७२॥

कन्यागते सवितरि पितरो यान्ति वै गुरुगृहम् । तिष्ठन्त्याकाङ्क्षिणस्तावद्यावद्वृश्चिकदर्शनम् ॥१७३॥
When the Sun is in Virgo (Kanyā), the ancestors are said to go to their revered abode and remain waiting expectantly until the Sun's entry into Scorpio. ॥१७३॥

कन्दमूलफलैर्वाऽपि कर्तव्यं पितृतर्पणम् । अन्यथा दारुणं शापं दत्त्वा यान्ति बुभुक्षिताः ॥१७४॥
Even with roots, tubers, and fruits, the ancestors should be offered nourishment. Otherwise, being hungry, they are said to depart after giving a terrible curse. ॥१७४॥

एकोद्दिष्टं तु मध्याह्न दिवसस्य विधीयते । आद्ये मुहूर्ते वा मास्य पिण्डदानं च भोजनम् ॥१७५॥
Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha is prescribed at midday. Alternatively, the piṇḍa offering and feeding may be performed during the first muhūrta of the prescribed day. ॥१७५॥

पितृक्षयाहे संप्राप्ते यदि कश्चिन्महालयः । तदा क्षयाहः कर्तव्योऽपरेऽहनि महालयम् ॥१७६॥
If the father's death anniversary occurs during Mahālaya, the death-anniversary Śrāddha should be performed on the following day, while the Mahālaya observance is performed [according to the prescribed arrangement]. ॥१७६॥

--- Page 18 ---

पूर्वाह्ने कामिकं श्राद्धं कुर्यान्नान्दीमुखं तथा । माध्याह्निकं यदा कुर्यान्नित्यश्राद्धं तदा भवेत् ॥१७७॥
The Kāmya Śrāddha and Nandīmukha Śrāddha should be performed in the forenoon. When the rite is performed at midday, it is regarded as Nitya Śrāddha. ॥१७७॥

द्वौ देवे च त्रयः पित्र्य एकैकमुभयत्र वा । मातामहानामप्येवं तन्त्रं वा वैश्वदैविकम् ॥१७८॥
Two Brāhmaṇas should be appointed for the divine portion and three for the ancestral portion; alternatively, one may be appointed for each. The same arrangement applies to the maternal ancestors. The rite may also be performed according to the Vaiśvadeva procedure. ॥१७८॥

इष्टिश्राद्धे क्रतुदक्षौ काम्ये च ध्वनिरोचनौ । पुरूरवार्द्रवसंज्ञौ तु पार्वणे समुदाहृतौ ॥१७९॥
In Iṣṭi Śrāddha, the deities Kratu and Dakṣa are invoked; in Kāmya Śrāddha, Dhvani and Rocana; and in Pārvaṇa Śrāddha, Purūravas and Ārdravasu are mentioned by name. ॥१७९॥

सापिण्डे कालकामौ तौ वृद्धौ सत्यवसू स्मृतौ । यज्ञे च बहवः सन्ति श्राद्धे श्राद्धे पृथक्पृथक् ॥१८०॥
In the Sapiṇḍa rite, Kāla and Kāma are [the presiding deities]; in the Vṛddhi rite, Satya and Vasu are remembered. In sacrifices there are many such deities, differing according to each Śrāddha. ॥१८०॥

पितरश्च पितामहास्तथा च प्रपितामहाः । एवं पार्वणसंज्ञा च तथा मातामहेष्वपि ॥१८१॥
The father, grandfather, and great-grandfather constitute the ancestral group known as the Pārvaṇa arrangement. The same applies to the maternal grandfather and the corresponding maternal ancestors. ॥१८१॥

एषां पत्न्यः क्रमाद्ग्राह्यास्तिस्त्रस्तिस्रश्च पार्वणे । उक्तानि चत्वार्येतानि पार्वणानि न पञ्चमम् ॥१८२॥
Their wives are likewise included, three in succession for each group in the Pārvaṇa rite. Four such Pārvaṇa arrangements have been described; there is no fifth. ॥१८२॥

वृद्धौ द्वादशदैवत्यं न चैवान्वष्टकासु च । षड्दर्श त्रीणि यज्ञे च एक एव क्षयेऽहनि ॥१८३॥
In the Vṛddhi rite there are twelve deities; in the Anvaṣṭakā rites, [the prescribed arrangement differs]. There are six in Darśa, three in the Yajña rite, and only one on the day of the ancestral death anniversary. ॥१८३॥

पार्वणं च क्षयाहे स्याद्वृद्धौ स्यान्नवदैवतम् । दर्श षड्दैवतं श्राद्धं काम्ये त्रैपौरुषं भवेत् ॥१८४॥
The Pārvaṇa arrangement is used on the death anniversary. In the Vṛddhi rite there are nine deities; Darśa Śrāddha has six; and Kāmya Śrāddha is performed for three generations. ॥१८४॥

वसुरुद्रादित्या अमी इज्यन्ते सहमेलने । चतुर्थस्यानिवृत्तिः स्यादाद्येनेतो भवेदिति ॥१८५॥
The Vasus, Rudras, and Ādityas are worshipped together in this arrangement. The fourth generation is not included; the offering proceeds from the first [three generations] as prescribed. ॥१८५॥

श्राद्धे स्त्रीपुंसयोः कार्यमेकोद्दिष्टमसंततेः । अतः संततिमन्तोऽमी इज्यन्ते बहुभिः सह ॥१८६॥
For a woman or man without descendants, Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha should be performed. Those who have descendants are therefore worshipped together with the larger ancestral group. ॥१८६॥

आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्तं पूर्वजाः सन्ति ये कुले । तृप्ता भवन्ति ते सर्वे पुत्रहस्तेन नान्यथा ॥१८७॥
All the ancestors belonging to the lineage, extending from Brahmā down to the smallest living being, are said to become satisfied through the hand of the son and not otherwise. ॥१८७॥

--- Page 19 ---

अपुत्रस्य गतिर्नास्ति स्वर्गो नैव च नैव च । येन केनाप्युपायेन पुत्रमुत्पादयेत्सुधीः ॥१८८॥
It is said that one without a son has no onward passage and no access to heaven, indeed none at all. Therefore, a wise man should, by whatever appropriate means, beget a son. ॥१८८॥

सैकोद्दिष्टं दैवहीनं यतः पुत्रो न विद्यते । आयान्ति पुत्रिणः पूर्वे देवर्षिपितृवेष्टिताः ॥१८९॥
Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha, without the divine portion, is prescribed where there is no son. The ancestors of those who have sons come accompanied by the divine sages and ancestral beings. ॥१८९॥

दर्श द्वे पार्वणे कार्ये मातुर्मातामहस्य च । क्षयाहे च पितुर्मातुः पार्वणं पार्वणं कृतम् ॥१९०॥
Two Pārvaṇa rites are to be performed: one for the mother's [ancestors] and one for the maternal grandfather. On the respective death anniversaries of the father and mother, the Pārvaṇa rite is likewise performed. ॥१९०॥

अष्टकासु नवभिः पिण्डैः श्राद्धमुदाहृतम् । पित्रादौ मातृमध्यस्थं ततो मातामहान्तिकम् ॥१९१॥
In the Aṣṭakā rites, Śrāddha with nine piṇḍas is prescribed: beginning with the paternal ancestors, with the maternal [ancestor] in the middle, and then extending to the maternal grandfather. ॥१९१॥

अन्वष्टक्ये पितृभ्यश्च ततस्त्रीभ्यश्च दैवतम् । ताभ्यस्त्वदैवतं वृद्धौ तेभ्यश्चापि सदैवतः ॥१९२॥
In the Anvaṣṭakā rite, offerings are made first to the paternal ancestors and thereafter to the women [ancestors]; the divine portion follows them. In the Vṛddhi rite, the divine portion is likewise performed in relation to them. ॥१९२॥

मातरः प्रथमं पूज्याः पितरश्च ततः परम् । मातामहश्च तदनु वृद्धिश्राद्धस्त्वयं क्रमः ॥१९३॥
The mothers should first be worshipped, followed by the fathers, and thereafter the maternal grandfather. This is the prescribed sequence for Vṛddhi Śrāddha. ॥१९३॥

पार्वणानि मयोक्तानि विपरीतानि तानि ते । अथर्वणास्तर्पयन्ति तद्वेदोक्तमतं यथा ॥१९४॥
I have described the Pārvaṇa rites and their respective arrangements. The Atharvaṇas perform the offerings according to the procedure taught in their Veda. ॥१९४॥

अतिथिश्राद्धरक्षार्थमन्ते विष्णुस्वरूपिणम् । निवेशये विष्णुसमं ब्राह्मणं वेदपारगम् ॥१९५॥
For the protection and completion of the Atithi Śrāddha, one should seat a Brāhmaṇa who is learned in the Vedas and who is regarded as equal to Viṣṇu, embodying Viṣṇu's form. ॥१९५॥

कव्यवाहादयो येऽमी विद्यन्ते ये च पूर्वजाः । सर्वेषामेव वर्णानां श्राद्धे तृप्यन्ति देवताः ॥१९६॥
Kavyavāha and the other ancestral deities, as well as the ancestors themselves, are present; in Śrāddha, the deities of all the varṇas become satisfied. ॥१९६॥

साक्षाद्विष्णुर्धर्मराजः श्राद्धदेवश्च कथ्यते । विश्वे देवाः पितृतिथिः सर्व विष्णुरिति स्मृतम् ॥१९७॥
Viṣṇu himself is said to be Dharmarāja and the deity presiding over Śrāddha. The Viśvedevas, the ancestral beings, and the entire Śrāddha rite are remembered as manifestations of Viṣṇu. ॥१९७॥

पूर्वजास्तुष्टिमायान्ति दाता भोक्ता न संशयः ॥१९८॥
The ancestors become satisfied through both the giver and the recipient of the offering; of this there is no doubt. ॥१९८॥

इति प्रजापतिस्मृतिः समाप्ता । ॐ तत्सत्
Thus ends the Prajāpati Smṛti. Om Tat Sat.
