अथ पुलस्त्यस्मृतिः

वर्णाश्रमधर्मवर्णनम्
Description of the duties of the varṇas and āśramas.

कुरुक्षेत्रे महात्मानं पुलस्त्यमृषयोऽब्रुवन् तांश्च धर्मान्प्रकारांश्च नो वद स्मार्तमागमम् १
At Kurukṣetra, the sages addressed the great sage Pulastya: “Tell us the various duties and forms of Dharma according to the Smārta tradition.” १

एवं पृष्टः प्रत्युवाच सर्वांस्तान् पृच्छत ऋषीन् पंचधा वास्थितं धर्म शृणुध्वं द्विजसत्तमाः २
Thus questioned, he replied: “You have asked about all these matters; O best of the twice-born, listen to Dharma, which is established in five divisions.” २

वर्णधर्मः स्मृतस्त्वेक आश्रमाणामतः परम् वर्णाश्रमस्तृतीयस्तु गुणनैमित्तिकस्तथा ३
The first is known as the Dharma of the varṇas, the second as the Dharma of the āśramas, the third as the Dharma common to varṇa and āśrama, and likewise there is the Dharma arising from particular qualities and circumstances. ३

वर्णमेकं समाश्रित्य योऽधिकारः प्रवर्तते वर्णधर्मः स विज्ञयो यथोपनयनं त्रिषु ४
The authority or prescribed duty that operates on the basis of a particular varṇa is known as varṇa-dharma, such as the rite of initiation (upanayana) prescribed for the three higher varṇas. ४

यस्त्वाश्रयं समाश्रित्य पदार्थः संविधीयते उक्त आश्रमधर्मस्तु भिक्षापिण्डादिकं तथा ५
That which is prescribed on the basis of a particular āśrama is called āśrama-dharma, such as obtaining alms and food, and similar duties. ५

उभयस्य निमित्तेन यो विधिः सम्प्रवर्तते नैमित्तिकः सविज्ञेयः प्रायश्चित्तविधिर्यथा ६
That rule which arises on account of particular circumstances connected with both is to be understood as naimittika, or occasion-based Dharma, such as the rules concerning expiation. ६

ब्रह्मचारी गृहस्थश्च वानप्रस्थश्च भिक्षुकः उक्त आश्रमधर्मस्तु राजधर्मस्तु पञ्चमः ७
The Brahmacārin, the householder, the forest-dweller, and the mendicant constitute the āśramas; the duties of these are called āśrama-dharma, while royal duty (rāja-dharma) is stated as the fifth. ७

वर्णधर्मश्चतुर्णां यः आश्रमाणां तथैव च द्वयोः साधारणो धर्मो यश्चासौदूयशेषभाक् ८
The duties of the four varṇas and likewise those of the āśramas are described; there is also Dharma common to both, along with that which remains as the common and residual duty. ८

इज्याध्ययनदानानि यथाशास्त्रं सनातनम् ब्रह्म क्षत्रिय वैश्यानां सामान्यो धर्म उच्यते ९
Worship, study, and giving gifts according to the scriptures are declared to be the eternal common duties of Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas. ९

याजनाध्ययने राज्ञो भूतानाञ्चाभिरक्षणम् पाशुपाल्यं कृषिश्चैव वैश्यस्याजीवनं स्मृतम् १०
For the Brāhmaṇa, officiating at sacrifices and studying are prescribed; for the king, the protection of beings; and for the Vaiśya, cattle-rearing and agriculture are declared to be means of livelihood. १०

शूद्रस्य द्विजशुश्रूषा द्विजानामनुपूर्वशः शूद्रा च वृत्तिस्तत्सेवा कारुण्यं कर्म तथैव च ११
The service of the twice-born is prescribed as the duty of the Śūdra, in accordance with the order of the twice-born; such service is his means of livelihood, together with compassion and related duties. ११

गुरौवासोऽग्मिशुश्रूषा स्वाध्यायो व्रत धारणिं त्रिकालस्त्रापिता भृत्यै गुरौ प्राणांतिकी स्थितिः १२
The Brahmacārin should reside with the teacher, serve the sacred fire, study the Veda, observe his vows, bathe three times a day, and remain in the service of his guru until the end of his life. १२

तदभावे गुरुसुते तथा सब्रह्मचारिणि कामतो वा समानत्वं स्वधर्मो ब्रह्मचारिणः १३
In the absence of the guru, he should serve the guru's son or his fellow Brahmacārin; according to his circumstances, treating them as equals is prescribed as the duty of the Brahmacārin. १३

समेखलो जटी दण्डी मुंडी गुरुगृहाश्रयः अन्यथा ग्रहमेधित्वं गच्छेत्कामतो वाश्रमांतरम् १४
Wearing the girdle, matted hair, and staff, or with the head shaven, he should remain in the guru's household; otherwise, if he desires, he may enter the householder's state or another āśrama. १४

अग्रिहोत्रोपचरणं जीवनञ्च स्वकर्मभिः धर्मदानेषु काम्येषु सर्वत्र जनविक्रयाः १५
The householder's duties include maintaining the Agnihotra, earning a livelihood through his own prescribed work, performing Dharma-related and optional charitable acts, and engaging in the various duties prescribed for household life. १५

देवपित्र्यतिथिभ्यश्च भूतानामानुकम्पिता श्रुतिस्मृत्युक्तसंस्कारो धर्मोऽयं गृहमेधिनः १६
Showing hospitality and compassion toward the gods, ancestors, guests, and living beings, together with the saṃskāras prescribed by Śruti and Smṛti, constitutes the Dharma of the householder. १६

जटित्वममिहोत्रित्वं भूशय्याजिनधारणम् वनेवासः पयोमूलनीवारकणवृत्तिता १७
The duties of the forest-dweller include wearing matted hair, maintaining the Agnihotra, sleeping upon the ground, wearing an animal skin, dwelling in the forest, and living upon milk, roots, nīvāra grain, and similar foods. १७

प्रतिग्रहनिवृत्तिश्च त्रिःस्त्रानं मौनधारणम् देवतातिथिपूजा च धर्मोऽयं वनवासिनाम् १८
Abstaining from accepting gifts, bathing three times a day, observing silence, and worshipping deities and guests constitute the Dharma of the forest-dweller. १८

सर्वारंभपरित्यागो भैक्षान्नं वृत्तमूलता निष्परिग्रहता द्रोहः समता सर्वजन्तुषु १९
Abandoning all undertakings, living on alms, making livelihood dependent upon what is obtained, possessing nothing, abstaining from hostility, and maintaining equality toward all beings १९

प्रियाप्रियपरिष्वङ्गः सुखदुःखाविकारिता स बाह्याभ्यन्तराशौचं नियमो व्रतकारिता २०
remaining unaffected by what is pleasant or unpleasant and by happiness or sorrow, maintaining external and internal purity, observing disciplines, and undertaking vows २०

सर्वेन्द्रियसमाहारो धारणाध्याननित्यता भावशुद्धिस्तथेत्येवं परिवाद्धर्म उच्यते २१
withdrawing all the senses, being constant in concentration and meditation, and maintaining purity of thought—these together are declared to be the Dharma of the renunciant. २१

अहिंसा सत्यवादश्च सत्यं शौचं दया क्षमा वर्णिनां लिङ्गिनाञ्चैव सामान्यो धर्म उच्यते २२
Non-violence, speaking the truth, purity, compassion, and forgiveness are declared to be the common Dharma of those belonging to the varṇas and those bearing the marks of the āśramas. २२

स्वज्ञानं हृदि सर्वेषां धर्मोऽयं वर्णिलिङ्गिनाम् उदृष्टार्थो द्विविधः प्रोक्तो दृष्टार्थश्च द्वितीयकः २३
Self-knowledge in the heart of all is declared to be the Dharma of those belonging to the varṇas and āśramas. Dharma is said to be of two kinds: that concerned with unseen results and, secondly, that concerned with visible results. २३

उभयार्थस्तृतीयश्च न्यायमूलश्चतुर्थकः उभयाव्यवहारश्च दंडधारणमेव च २४
The third is that which concerns both visible and unseen results; the fourth is that which is founded upon justice. Conduct concerning both, together with the holding and application of punishment, is also described. २४

तुल्यार्थानां विकल्पःस्यानयायमूलः प्रकीर्त्तितः वेदे तु विदितो धर्मः स्मृतौ तादृश एव तु २५
When there are alternative rules concerning matters of equal applicability, the choice between them is said to be founded upon reason and justice. Dharma known from the Veda is likewise recognized in Smṛti. २५

अनुवाकः श्रुतिसूक्तं कार्यार्थमिति मानवाः तदर्थश्च प्रयासोऽयं स च सेव्यः फलार्थिना २६
The Anuvāka and the hymns of Śruti are intended for the accomplishment of prescribed purposes; effort toward those purposes is therefore to be undertaken by one who seeks their fruits. २६

उक्तः पञ्च विधो धर्मः श्रेयोऽभ्युदयहेतुकः पुरुषाणां यथायोगं स च सेव्यः फलार्थिना २७
Thus Dharma has been described as fivefold, being the cause of both ultimate good and worldly prosperity; according to one's qualification, it should be followed by one who seeks its fruits. २७

सद्यस्तु प्रौढबालायामन्यथा वत्सराच्छचिः प्रदाता यां त्रिरात्रेण दत्तायां पक्षिणी भवेत् २८
When given immediately, it is applicable in the case of a mature or young woman; otherwise, purity is attained after a year. When given under the specified circumstances, purification is attained in three nights, while in another case it extends to a fortnight. २८

इति पुलस्त्यप्रोक्तं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम्
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra spoken by Pulastya.
