--- Page 1 ---
।। श्रीगणेशाय नमः ।।
May Lord Ganesha be worshipped.

* व्याघ्रपादस्मृतिः *
  Vyāghrapāda Smṛti

तत्रादौ स्मृतिमहत्त्ववर्णनम्
Here, first, the greatness and importance of the Smṛti is described.

ऋषिमेकान्तमासीनं व्याघ्र मतिमतां वरम् । पप्रच्छुर्मुनयः सर्वे धर्मशास्त्रकथानकम् ॥ १ ॥
All the sages asked the sage Vyāghra, the foremost among the wise, who was seated in solitude, about the teachings of the Dharmaśāstra.

हुताग्निहोत्रं विधिवत् व्याघ्रं वेदविदां वरम् । सर्वशास्त्रविधिं ज्ञात्वा ऋषिभिश्चनमस्कृतम् ॥ २ ॥
Vyāghra, the foremost among those learned in the Vedas, had duly performed the Agnihotra sacrifice. Having understood the injunctions of all the Śāstras, he was revered by the sages.

नमस्कृत्य च ते सर्वे इदं वचनमब्रुवन् । हितार्थं सर्वलोकानां भगवन् कथयस्व नः ॥ ३ ॥
Having bowed to him, all of them spoke these words: “O Blessed One, tell us this for the welfare of all people.”

वेदतत्त्वार्थतत्त्वज्ञा यन्मां पृच्छथ संशये । ते सर्वे संप्रवक्ष्यामि यथादृष्ट ं यथाश्रुतम् ॥ ४ ॥
Since you ask me about the essential meaning and truth of the Vedas, I shall explain all of it to you exactly as I have seen and heard it.

सर्वतीर्थान्युपस्पृश्य सर्वान्वेदान्प्रणम्य च । जप्त्वा तु सवसूक्तानि सवशास्त्रानुसारतः ॥ ५॥
Having approached all the sacred tīrthas, having bowed to all the Vedas, and having recited all the Sava hymns in accordance with the injunctions of the Śāstras,

सर्वपापहरं दिव्यं सर्वसंशयनाशनम् । चतुर्णामपि वर्णानां व्याघ्रः शास्त्रमकल्पयत् ॥ ६ ॥
Vyāghra composed this divine Śāstra, which removes all sins and destroys every doubt, for all four varṇas.

ये च पापकृतोलोके ये चान्ये धर्मदूषकाः । सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यन्ते श्रुत्वेदं शास्त्रमुत्तमम् ॥ ७ ॥
Those who commit sins in this world, and those others who violate Dharma, become freed from all sins upon hearing this excellent Śāstra.

तस्मादिदं वेद‌विद्भिरध्येतव्यं प्रयत्नतः । शिष्येभ्यश्च प्रवक्तव्यं सवृत्तेभ्यश्चसर्वतः ॥ ८ ॥
Therefore, those learned in the Vedas should study this diligently, and it should be taught to disciples who conduct themselves properly, in every respect.

--- Page 2 ---

आचारं चैव सर्वेषां कार्याणां च विनिर्णयम् । यथाक्रमं यथायोग्य वक्तु मर्हस्यशेषतः ॥ ९ ॥
You should explain completely, in proper order and according to what is appropriate, the conduct of all and the determination of the various duties.

भगवन् सर्ववर्णानां यथावदनुपूर्वशः । अन्तरं च प्रभावानां धर्मान्नो वक्तुमर्हसि ॥१०॥
O Blessed One, you should explain to us properly, in due order, the Dharma of all the varṇas, as well as the distinctions and differences in their respective powers and influences.

युगेयुगे च सामर्थ्य विशेषं मुनिभाषितम् । व्याघ्रण च यथाप्रोक्त' प्रायश्चित्तं प्रदीप्यते ।।११।।
The sages have declared that the capacities differ in each age; and Vyāghra has explained the forms of expiation accordingly.

युगेयुगे च ये धर्मास्तेषु तेषु च ये द्विजाः । तेषां निन्दा न कर्तव्या युगरूपा हि ते द्विजाः ॥१२॥
The Dharmas prescribed for each age, and the twice-born who follow them in their respective ages, should not be condemned, for those twice-born conform to the character of their particular age.

अकृते वैश्वदेवे तु ये भुंजन्ति द्विजातयः । वृथा ते तेन पाकेन काकयोनि व्रजन्ति वै ॥१३॥
Those twice-born who eat without performing the Vaiśvadeva sacrifice, their cooking is considered fruitless, and they indeed enter the womb of crows.

ब्रह्मचारी गृहस्थश्च वानप्रस्थो यतिस्तथा । एतेषां तु हितार्थाय व्याघ्रः शास्त्रमकल्पयत् ।।१४।।
For the welfare of the brahmacārin, the householder, the forest-dweller, and the ascetic, Vyāghra composed this Śāstra.

योऽनधीत्य द्विजो वेदानन्यत्र कुरुते श्रमम् । स जीवन्नेव शूद्रत्वमाशु गच्छति सान्वयः ॥१५।।
The twice-born person who, without studying the Vedas, exerts himself in other pursuits, quickly falls into the status of a Śūdra while still alive, together with his lineage.

भानौभौमे त्रयोदश्यां नंदाभृगुमघासु च । पिंडदानं मृदास्नानं न कुर्यात्तिलतर्पणम् ।।१६।।
On Sundays and Tuesdays, on the thirteenth lunar day, on Nandā days, on Fridays, and under the Maghā constellation, one should not offer piṇḍas, bathe with earth, or perform tila-tarpaṇa.

पक्षयोरुभयोर्वापि सप्तम्यां निशि सन्ध्ययोः । विद्यापुत्रकलत्रार्थी तिलान् सप्तसु वर्जयेत् ॥१७৷৷
On the seventh day of either fortnight, at night, and at the times of the twilights, one who desires learning, children, or a wife should avoid sesame on these seven occasions.

विवाहे चोपनयने चौले सति यथाक्रमम् । वर्षमधं तद्ध वा नेत्येके तिलतर्पणम् ।।१८।।
After marriage, initiation of upanayana, and the cūḍā ceremony, respectively, some authorities say that tila-tarpaṇa should not be performed for half a year or for one year.

वृद्धौ सत्यां च तन्मासि नेत्याहुस्तिलतर्पणम् । तीर्थ तिथिविशेषे च गयायां प्रेतपक्षके ॥१९॥
When there is a period of mourning, some say that tila-tarpaṇa should not be performed during that month. However, at sacred tīrthas, on special lunar days, at Gayā, and during the Preta-pakṣa, [such restrictions are not applicable].

--- Page 3 ---

निषिद्धेऽपि दिने कुर्यात्तर्पणं तिलमिश्रितम् । तिथितीर्थविशेषे तु कार्यं प्रेते च सर्वदा ॥२०॥
Even on a prohibited day, one should perform tarpaṇa mixed with sesame; but on special sacred lunar days and at sacred tīrthas, it should always be performed, and also in the case of the departed.

देवानृषीन्न्पितॄश्चैव तर्पयेत्तु प्रयत्नतः । आचम्य मार्जनं कुर्यात्ततः प्राणान्समापयेत् ॥२१॥
One should carefully offer tarpaṇa to the gods, ṛṣis, and ancestors. After performing ācamana, one should perform purification by sprinkling water and then regulate the vital breaths.

अग्रजन्मगृहे प्राप्त श्राद्धं सतिलकं भवेत् । तिलकेनविनाकार्य पितृकर्म निरर्थकम् ॥२२॥
When a śrāddha is performed in the house of one's forefathers, it should be accompanied by the application of a tilaka. A rite for the ancestors performed without the tilaka is fruitless.

अग्रजन्मैः सदाकार्य श्राद्धं सतिलकं तथा । श्रौतस्मार्तानि कर्माणि तिलकेन समाचरेत् ।।२३।।
Śrāddha should always be performed by the descendants of the forefathers with the tilaka. Śrauta and Smārta rites should likewise be performed with the tilaka.

मृत्तिका गोशकृत् दर्भा उपवीतोत्तरीयकम् । दद्याद्विप्रत्वमाप्नोति श्राद्धकाले विशेषतः ॥२४॥
One who gives earth, cow dung, darbha grass, a sacred thread, and an upper garment, particularly at the time of śrāddha, attains the status of a Brāhmaṇa.

गोपीचन्दनखण्डांश्च यो दद्याद्ब्राह्मणे यदि । अपि सर्षपमात्रेण ब्रह्महत्यां व्यपोहति ।।२५।।
Whoever gives pieces of Gopīcandana to a Brāhmaṇa destroys even the sin of Brahminicide, even if the quantity given is merely the size of a mustard seed.

मृदं यज्ञोपवीतं च श्राद्ध दद्यात्प्रयत्नतः । उच्छिष्टं शिवनिर्माल्यं कुर्याच्छ्राद्ध विशेषतः ।।२६।।
One should carefully give earth and a sacred thread at the śrāddha. One should also especially offer the remnants of food and Śiva's nirmālya at the śrāddha.

निषिद्धानि च वाक्यानि शूद्राणां योषितां तथा । शून्यमुखेन कर्तव्यं श्राद्ध कर्म यथाविधि ॥२७॥
Words forbidden to Śūdras and women should [not be uttered]; the śrāddha rite should be performed according to the prescribed procedure, with a silent mouth.

श्राद्ध कुर्यात्तु शूद्रोऽपि शून्यं कुर्याल्ललाटकम् । ललाटेतिलकं दृष्ट्वा निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥२८॥
Even a Śūdra may perform śrāddha, but he should keep his forehead without a tilaka. Seeing a tilaka on the forehead, the ancestors depart disappointed.

शूद्रेणतिलकं कृत्वा श्राद्धकर्मसु यत्कृतम् । निष्फलं तद्भवेच्छ्राद्ध पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥२९॥
Whatever śrāddha rite is performed by a Śūdra after applying a tilaka becomes fruitless; it does not reach the ancestors.

यो यस्यविहितो धर्मस्तेनधर्मेण कारयेत् । विपरीतं चरेद्यस्तु किल्विषी स निगद्यते ॥३०॥
Whatever Dharma is prescribed for a person, he should perform his duties according to that Dharma. Whoever acts contrary to it is declared to be guilty of sin.

--- Page 4 ---

देवानम्यर्च्यगंधेन त्रिपुंड्रं पापनाशनम् । तिलकेन विना श्राद्धं तत्सर्वं निष्फलं भवेत् ॥३१॥
After worshipping the gods with fragrant substances, one should apply the Tripuṇḍra, which destroys sins. Without the tilaka, the entire śrāddha becomes fruitless.

"तिलकेन विना सन्ध्या तिलकेन विना जपः ।"
"Without the tilaka, Sandhyā is [incomplete]; without the tilaka, japa is [incomplete]."

अंगवंगकलिङ्गाश्च तैलङ्गा द्राविड़ास्तथा । सदा शून्यमुखा ज्ञेया देशधर्मानुसारतः ।।३२।।
The people of Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Tailaṅga, and Drāviḍa should always be regarded as having an unmarked forehead, according to the customs of their respective regions.

अन्ये च बहवोधर्मा देशेदेशे व्यवस्थिताः । ते ते धर्माः सदाकार्या व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ॥३३॥
There are also many other customs established in different regions. Those respective customs should always be observed, according to the teaching of Vyāghra.

श्राद्धकाले तथा दाने होमे देवार्चने तथा । विधिवत्तिलकं कुर्यान्मृदा वा चन्दनेन वा ॥३४॥
At the time of śrāddha, as well as during gifts, homa, and worship of the gods, one should properly apply the tilaka, either with earth or with sandalwood.

धारयेदूर्ध्वपुंड्र तु स्नानान्ते च विशेषतः । तर्पणे होमकाले च सायं प्रातः समाहितः ।॥३५।।
One should wear the Ūrdhvapuṇḍra, especially after bathing. One should also wear it attentively during tarpaṇa and homa, both in the morning and evening.

तिर्यक्पुद्धं न कुर्वीत यावद्धोमं समाचरेत् । शिलागन्धानुलेपेन मार्जारोच्छिष्टभोजनात् ।।३६।।
One should not apply a transverse mark while performing homa. By applying fragrant substance from a stone and by eating food left over by a cat, [one incurs impurity].

स्वरूपदर्शनादप्सु भाग्यहीनोभवेन्नरः । शुभ्र वृतं विप्रैस्तु क्षयार्थे कुरुवीक्षणम् ॥३७।
A person becomes deprived of good fortune by seeing his own reflection in water. Brāhmaṇas should observe the white [mark/rite] for the destruction [of impurity/sin].

ललाटै यैः कृतं नित्यं मृदाचन्दनभस्मना । धारयेदूधपुंड्र तु स्नानान्ते च विशेषतः ॥३८।।
Those who regularly make [a mark] on the forehead with earth, sandalwood, or sacred ash should especially wear the Ūrdhvapuṇḍra after bathing.

गृहानागत्य होमांते भस्मना च त्रिपुण्ड्रकम् । स्नात्वापुण्ड' मृदा कुयात् होमं कृत्वा तु भस्मना ॥३९॥
After returning home and completing the homa, one should apply the Tripuṇḍra with sacred ash. After bathing, one should make the [mark] with earth, and after performing homa, with sacred ash.

"देवानभ्यर्च्य गंधेन त्रिपुंड्रं' पापनाशनम् ।।"
"After worshipping the gods with fragrant substance, the Tripuṇḍra destroys sins."

आशौचेपि न चाभ्यङ्ग विवाहे चन्दनादिना । ऊर्ध्वपुंड्रं सदाकार्यं श्रौते स्मार्ते च कमणि ॥४०॥
Even during a period of impurity, one should not perform an oil bath; at marriage, one should use sandalwood and other such substances. The Ūrdhvapuṇḍra should always be applied during Śrauta and Smārta rites.


--- Page 5 ---

सूतके समनुप्राप्त वर्जनीयः प्रयत्नतः । मृत्तिका चन्दनं भस्म तथा तोयं चतुर्थकम् ॥४१॥
Upon the occurrence of the period of impurity following birth or death, these should be avoided with care: earth, sandalwood, sacred ash, and water, the fourth.

एमिद्र व्यैर्यथाकालं तिलकं तु समाचरेत् । देवानां च तथा शैवे नाभ्यंगे न च शूद्रतः ॥४२॥
According to the proper time, one should apply the tilaka with these substances. For the worship of the gods and in Śaiva rites, however, there should be no oil bath, nor should a Śūdra perform it.

अभ्यङ्गाद्धरते लक्ष्मीं शूद्रस्य नरकं ध्रुवम् । तर्जनीं रौप्यसंयुक्तां ब्रह्मग्रन्थियुतां शिखाम् ॥४३॥
An oil bath removes prosperity, and for a Śūdra it certainly leads to hell. The index finger should be provided with silver, and the śikhā should be tied with a Brahma-knot.

भोजने मैथुने मूत्रे कृत्वा कृच्छ्र ं समाचरेत् । तर्जन्यां च धृतं रौप्यं ब्रह्मग्रन्थौ च मूर्द्धनि ।।४४।।
After eating, sexual intercourse, or urination, one should perform the prescribed Kṛcchra purification. Silver should be worn on the index finger and the Brahma-knot should be on the head.

भोजने मैथुने मूत्रे कुर्वन्कृच्छ्रण शुध्यति । शिखावंधं विमुच्याथ हस्तप्रक्षालनं स्मृतम् ।।४५।।
By performing the Kṛcchra after eating, sexual intercourse, or urination, one becomes purified. After loosening the śikhā-tie, washing the hands is prescribed.

न करोति स मूढात्मा तदन्नं केशदूषितम् । प्राङ्‌मुखोदङ्‌मुखो वापि कुर्यादाचमनं तदा ।।४६।।
The deluded person who does not do this [makes] that food impure through the hair. At that time, he should perform ācamana facing east or north.

पश्चिमे पुनराचम्य दक्षिणे स्नानमाचरेत् । गोकर्णकृतहस्तेन माषमात्रं जलं पिबेत् ।।४७।
He should perform ācamana again facing west and bathe facing south. With the hand formed like a cow's ear, he should drink an amount of water equal to a māṣa.

तन्न्यूनमधिकं चैव तज्जलं रुधिरं भवेत् । अनुष्णाभिरफेनाभिरद्भिर्ह द्याभिरंततः ।। ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मतीर्थेन दृष्टिपूताभिराचमेत् ।।४८।।
If that amount is less or more, the water becomes like blood. A Brāhmaṇa should perform ācamana with water that is neither hot nor foamy, using water that is pure and sanctified by sight, through the Brahma-tīrtha.

हत्कण्ठतालुकाभिश्च यथासंख्यं द्विजातयः । स्त्रीशूद्रवास्यसंस्पर्शमात्रेणापि विशुद्धयति ॥४९॥
The twice-born are purified, respectively, by [water reaching] the heart, throat, and palate. Women and Śūdras are purified even merely by contact with [the prescribed water].

अंगुष्ठाये तु संमृज्य मध्यमा मध्यपर्वसु । योजीताग्रेण हस्तेन स वै गोकणिकः स्मृतः ।।५०।।
Having rubbed the thumb [and joining it] with the middle finger at the middle joints, one should use the tips of the fingers; this hand formation is known as the Gokaṇika.

--- Page 6 ---

मुक्ताङ्गुष्ठकनिष्ठाभ्यां त्रिः पिवेत् ब्रह्मतीर्थतः । स्नात्वा पीत्वा श्रुते सुप्त भुत्क्त्वा रथ्याप्रसर्पणे ॥५१॥
With the thumb and little finger released, one should drink water three times from the Brahma-tīrtha. After bathing, drinking, hearing [the Veda], sleeping, eating, or moving about on the public road, [one should perform ācamana].

आचान्तः पुनराचामेद् वासोऽपिपरिधाय च । ऊर्ध्वजानुस्तु नाचामेदेकपाण्यादृतेन च ।।५२।।
After performing ācamana, one should perform it again after putting on one's garment. One should not perform ācamana with the knees raised or with only one hand [used improperly].

तथैव ब्रह्महस्तेन नापरिज्ञातहस्ततः । आपः स्पर्शनकाले तु तर्जन्यां तु स्पृशेज्जलम् ।। तज्जलं च पिबेद्विप्रः सोमपानसमं भवेत् ॥५३॥
Likewise, it should be done with the Brahma-hand and not with a hand formed improperly. At the time of touching the water, one should touch the water with the index finger. If a Brāhmaṇa drinks that water, it becomes equivalent to drinking Soma.

आपः करनखैः स्पृष्ट्वा तेनाचामति यो द्विजः । सुरां पिबति वै व्यक्त व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ।।५४।।
The twice-born who touches the water with his fingernails and then performs ācamana thereby is, in effect, drinking liquor; thus declares Vyāghra.

पीतोच्छिष्ट' पादशौचं शौचशेषं तु यज्जलम् । तज्जलं तु सुरातुल्यं पर्यग्निकरणं विना ॥५५।।
The water remaining after drinking, after washing the feet, or after completing purification is equivalent to liquor, unless it has undergone the prescribed purification by fire.

कांस्येनायसपात्रेण त्रपुसीसकपित्तलैः । आचान्तः शतकृत्वोपि न कदाचन शुध्यति ।।५६।।
Even if one performs ācamana a hundred times using vessels made of bronze, iron, tin, lead, or brass, one is never thereby purified.

कटिमंडलमावृत्य नाभ्यन्तर्दक्षिणोत्तरे । कच्छं द्वादशपिंजूलं पुरापश्चात्प्रयुज्यते ॥५७॥
Having covered the region around the waist, the kacca should be arranged around the navel, from right to left. The twelve folds are to be arranged from front to back.

एकराशिगतौ स्यातां यदा गुरुनिशाकरौ । सा पौर्णमासी महती सर्वपापहरा स्मृता ।।५८।।
When Jupiter and the Moon come together in the same sign, that full-moon day is regarded as the great Pūrṇimā, which destroys all sins.

आब्दिके समनुप्राप्त आशौचं यदि जायते । आशौचे तु व्यतिक्रान्ते तत्र श्राद्ध प्रदीयते ॥५९॥
If a period of impurity occurs when the annual śrāddha has arrived, the śrāddha should be performed after the period of impurity has passed.

अनपत्या च या नारी भर्तृपिंडेन योजयेत् । यदि जीवति भर्तारं श्वश्रेयादिभिर्योजयेत् ॥ ६०।।
A woman who has no children should be joined with her husband's piṇḍa. If her husband is alive, she should be joined with her mother-in-law and other [female relatives].

--- Page 7 ---

पितामहाश्चजीवंति तत्पिता म्रियते यदि । देहमात्रत्रयः पिण्डान् प्रपितामहपूर्वकम् ॥६१॥
If the paternal grandfather is alive but his father dies, three piṇḍas should be offered, beginning with the great-grandfather.

जीवन् पितामहोयस्य पिता यत्र न विद्यते । द्वौपिंडा वेकनामानौ एकस्मिन्प्रपितामहे ॥६२॥
If someone's paternal grandfather is alive and his father is no longer living, two piṇḍas bearing one name should be offered, with the great-grandfather included in one [of them].

चत्वारि अर्घ्यपात्राणि गंधमाल्यैस्ततोऽर्चयेत् । ये समानि ऋचामेतत्पात्रस्थापो नयेत्त्रिषु ॥६३॥
Thereafter, four arghya vessels should be worshipped with fragrances and garlands. The waters in these vessels should be combined according to the prescribed verses and transferred into the three [vessels].

पक्षश्राद्ध तु निवृत्य तर्पणं तु दिनेदिने । सकृन्महालये श्राद्ध परेऽहनि तिलोदकम् ॥६४॥
After completing the fortnightly śrāddha, tarpaṇa should be performed every day. At the Mahālaya, śrāddha should be performed once, and on the following day water mixed with sesame should be offered.

दर्शश्राद्ध गयाश्राद्ध श्राद्ध चापरपक्षगे । ताम्बूल चर्वणं दोषो व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ।।६५।।
At the Darśa śrāddha, Gayā śrāddha, and śrāddha performed during the latter fortnight, chewing betel is considered improper, according to the statement of Vyāghra.

वृद्धावादौ क्षयेचान्ते दर्श मध्ये तथैव च । महालये च पिण्डान्ते वैश्वदेवं चतुर्विधम् ।।६६।।
At the beginning of the increase, at the end of the waning, in the middle of the Darśa, and at the end of the piṇḍas at Mahālaya—these are the four occasions for Vaiśvadeva.

श्राद्ध' कृत्वा तु विधिवत् वैश्वदेवादिकं ततः । ब्रह्मयज्ञ ततः कुर्यात्तर्पणं तु तिलैर्विना ॥६७॥
Having duly performed the śrāddha and the Vaiśvadeva rites and the other prescribed rites, one should then perform the Brahmayajña, followed by tarpaṇa without sesame seeds.

स्नात्वातीरं समागत्य उपविश्य कुशासने । संतर्पयेत् पितॄन्सर्वान् स्नात्वा वस्त्र' च धारयेत् ।।६८।।
Having bathed and returned to the bank, one should sit upon a seat of kuśa grass and offer tarpaṇa to all the ancestors. After bathing, one should put on clean garments.

सहोदर समुत्पन्नां कुर्याद्द वपितृ स्तथा । एकमेकं तु गोत्राणां कुर्याद् ब्राह्मणजो भवेत् ।।६९।।
One should perform the prescribed rites for those born from the same parents and likewise for the ancestors. For each gotra, one should perform [the rite] separately; thus one becomes a Brāhmaṇa-born [or follows the prescribed Brāhmaṇa practice].

सहगोत्रजा ब्राह्मणानां न कुर्यात्सर्वतो द्विजः । याज्ञवल्क्यं तु कार्याणि वर्जनीया प्रयत्नतः ॥७०।।
A twice-born person should not perform [the prescribed rite] for Brāhmaṇas belonging to the same gotra. The practices associated with Yājñavalkya should be carefully avoided.

वेदज्ञातो द्विजातीनां कुर्याद्ब्राह्मणतो भवेत् । एकगोत्रं द्वितीयं तु तृतीयाग्निस्तथैव च ॥७१॥
Knowing the Veda, one should perform the prescribed rites for the twice-born; thereby one becomes [qualified] as a Brāhmaṇa. The first is one gotra, the second likewise, and the third is Agni.

--- Page 8 ---

एकगोत्र ब्राह्मणानां पृथक् गोत्रस्तथैव च । कुर्याच्छ्राद्धादि कार्याणि महालयां तु सिद्धये ।।७२।।
For Brāhmaṇas of the same gotra, and likewise for those of different gotras, one should perform the rites beginning with śrāddha for the proper completion of the Mahālaya rites.

वानप्रस्थयतीनां तु ब्रह्मचारिस्तथैव च । कुर्याच्छ्राद्धादिकं तस्य व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ॥७३।।
For those in the vānaprastha and yati stages, and likewise for brahmacārins, one should perform the rites beginning with śrāddha; thus states Vyāghra.

पूर्वेद्युः क्षणितोविप्रो ब्राह्मणः कर्तृ कं यथा । अनुज्ञायतां कार्याणि कृपां कर्तुं यथाविधि ॥७४॥
On the preceding day, a Brāhmaṇa should be invited and requested for permission, so that the rites may be performed properly and with his gracious consent.

पूर्वेद्युः क्षणितं विप्रं यजुः शास्त्र तथैव च । गोत्रं नाम समुच्चार्य व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा । ७५।।
On the preceding day, the invited Brāhmaṇa, according to the Yajur-śāstra, should have his gotra and name duly pronounced; thus states Vyāghra.

गायत्र्याः स्थानमास्यं च मंडलं स विधीचते । गायत्र्या गोमयं तस्य मंडलं कारयेद्ध वम् ॥७६॥
The place and mouth of the Gāyatrī are prescribed as a maṇḍala. By means of the Gāyatrī, a maṇḍala should be made with cow dung.

गायत्र्या वत्सप्रस्थानं मंडलं कुरुते यदि । मंडलं तोयमादाय कुशतिलैस्तथैव च ॥७७॥
If, by means of the Gāyatrī, one makes the maṇḍala according to the prescribed arrangement, one should prepare the maṇḍala with water, kuśa grass, and sesame seeds.

श्राद्धकर्मणि । मंडलं बाहुमात्रं च कुर्याद्धं देवकार्येषु सर्वत्रारत्निमात्रं प्रशस्यते ॥७८॥
In śrāddha rites, the maṇḍala should be of the measure of one arm. For rites performed for the gods, a measure of one aratni is prescribed everywhere.

गृहस्योत्तरतोभागे कुर्याद् गोमयमंडलम् । उत्तरे मंडले देवा दक्षिणे पितरस्तथा ।।७९।।
In the northern part of the house, one should make a maṇḍala of cow dung. The gods are [to be placed] in the northern maṇḍala, while the ancestors are [to be placed] in the southern one.

हस्तस्यव्यवधानेन मंडले द्वच कारयेत् । पूर्वप्लवं वृद्धिकरं नराणां, तथोत्तरं चैव धनप्रदं त्र ।। धनक्षयं पश्चिमतप्लवेन, आयुःक्षयं दक्षिणतप्लवेन ।|८०।।
The maṇḍalas should be made with a hand's breadth of separation. A slope toward the east brings prosperity to people, and likewise a slope toward the north bestows wealth. A slope toward the west causes loss of wealth, while a slope toward the south causes diminution of longevity.

--- Page 9 ---

पादप्रक्षालनार्थाय द्वौविप्रौ प्राङ्‌मुखस्थितौ । उदङ्‌मुखास्त्रयोविप्रा स्वयं वै दक्षिणामुखः ॥८१॥
For washing the feet, two Brāhmaṇas should sit facing east, three Brāhmaṇas should face north, and the performer himself should face south.

पादप्रभृति मून्नर्थन्तं देवानां शिरःप्रभृतिपादान्तं पितॄणां पुष्पपूजनम् । पुष्पपूजनम् ।।८२।।
For the gods, the worship with flowers should proceed from the feet upward to the head; for the ancestors, it should proceed from the head down to the feet. This is the prescribed flower worship.

श्राद्धकाले यदा पत्नीं वामे वारिंप्रदापयेत् । पितरस्तस्य गृह्णीयात् यावद्वर्षशतं समाः ॥८३॥
At the time of śrāddha, when the wife offers water while seated on the husband's left side, his ancestors accept that offering for a hundred years.

कन्यादाने विवाहे च प्रतिष्ठायज्ञकर्मणि । सर्वेषु धर्मकार्येषु पत्नी दक्षिणतः स्मृता ॥८४॥
At the giving away of a daughter, at marriage, in consecration rites, sacrificial ceremonies, and all religious rites, the wife is prescribed to be on the husband's right side.

दक्षिणे वसति पत्नी हवने देवतार्चने । शुश्रूषा रतिकाले च वामभागे प्रशस्यते ।।८५।।
The wife remains on the right side during oblations and worship of the deities. During service and at the time of sexual union, her position on the left side is prescribed as auspicious.

जातकर्मादि कम्भेणां कर्मकर्तु श्चदक्षिणे । तिष्ठेद्वरस्य वामे च विप्राशीर्वचनं यथा ॥८६॥
During rites such as Jātakarma and the other ceremonies, she should stand to the right of the performer and to the left of the bridegroom, according to the words of the Brāhmaṇas.

त्रिषु स्थानेषु सा पत्नी वामभागे प्रशस्यते । पादशौचे पितॄणां च रथारोहे ऋतौ तथा ।॥८७॥
In these three situations the wife is prescribed to be on the left side: during the washing of the ancestors' feet, when mounting a chariot, and during her menstrual period.

श्राद्ध पत्नी च वामांगे पादप्रक्षालने तथा । नान्दीश्राद्ध च सोमे च मधुपर्के च दक्षिणे ॥८८॥
During śrāddha and the washing of the feet, the wife should be on the left side; during Nandīśrāddha, Soma rites, and the offering of madhuparka, she should be on the right side.

आमन्त्रितस्तु यो विप्रो भुत्क्त्वा अन्यत्रगच्छति । नरकाणां शतं भुत्क्त्वा चांडालेष्वपि जायते ॥८९॥
The Brāhmaṇa who, after being invited [to a śrāddha], eats and then goes elsewhere is said to suffer a hundred hells and to be reborn among outcastes.

एकवस्त्रा तु या नारी मुक्तकेशा तथैव च । ललाटे कुंकुमं दृष्ट्वा निराशाः पितरो गताः ॥९०॥
When a woman wears only a single garment and has her hair loose, and when the ancestors see vermilion on her forehead, they depart disappointed.

मुक्तकेशा तु या नारी रक्तवस्त्र कथंचन । हसते वदते चैव निराशाः पितरो गताः ॥९१॥
When a woman has her hair loose, wears red garments, and laughs or speaks [in such a state], the ancestors depart disappointed.

--- Page 10 ---

श्राद्ध यज्ञे जपे होमे वैश्वदेवे शिवार्चने । त्रिपुंङ धारयेद्यस्तु निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥९२॥
Whoever wears the tripuṇḍra during śrāddha, sacrifice, japa, homa, Vaiśvadeva, and the worship of Śiva causes the ancestors to depart disappointed.

अगम्यागमनोपेता द्यतासत्यरताञ्च ये । नानाविधेषु पापेषु रता नित्यं मदोद्धताः ॥९३॥
Those who associate with forbidden women, delight in gambling and falsehood, engage constantly in various kinds of sins, and are always overcome by arrogance [are condemned].

आसीमांतेन पूर्वेण ताम्बूलं भक्षये द्विजः । त्रयस्ते नरकं यान्ति दाताभोक्ता पिता तथा ॥९४॥
A twice-born person should consume betel only up to the prescribed limit. The giver, the consumer, and the father of the consumer—all three are said to go to hell.

शिलातले पटे पात्रे रोमकूपे तथा भुवि । ते तिलाः कृमिणा तुल्याः तत्तोयं रूधिरं भवेत् ।।९५।।
Sesame seeds placed on a stone surface, cloth, vessel, the pores of the body, or directly on the ground are considered equivalent to worms, and the water associated with them becomes like blood.

अंगुष्ठमूलमध्ये तु वामभागेऽप्रभागिनाम् । तत्तिलं मेरुणातुल्यं तत्तोयं सागरोपमम् ॥९६॥
The sesame placed at the left side of the base of the thumb, in the prescribed place of offering, is said to be equal to Mount Meru, and the water offered with it is said to be equal to the ocean.

आपः कृष्णतिलैर्दद्यान्मात्रापित्रोः क्षयेऽहनि । आदौ च यजुषां दद्यात् पश्चाद्वह्न च सामगाः ॥९७॥
On the day of the monthly or annual observance for the ancestors, one should offer water with black sesame to the mother and father. First, it should be offered according to the Yajurvedic rite, and afterward the Sāmagas should make the offering into the fire.

सकारे सूतकं विद्याद्वकारे रिपुवर्द्धनं । हकारे ब्रह्महत्यायां आहुतिः कुत्र दीयते ॥९८॥
In the syllable beginning with “sa” there is said to be impurity; in “va,” the increase of enemies; and in “ha,” the sin of Brahmin-killing. Therefore, where should the oblation be offered?

वर्णत्रयं समुच्चार्य दीर्घ दद्याद्विजोत्तमः । आयुरारोग्यमैश्वर्य लभते काममीप्सितम् ॥९९॥
The excellent twice-born should pronounce the three syllables and make the prescribed prolonged utterance. By doing so, one obtains longevity, health, prosperity, and the desired object.

स्नानं तौ वरुणः शक्तिर्जुह्वतोऽग्निधनक्षयम् । जपतः क्षीणमायुष्यं तस्मान्मौनं त्रिषु स्मृतम् ।।१००।।
Bathing [while uttering them] is associated with Varuṇa; [improper utterance] while making oblations diminishes the fire and wealth; and [improper utterance] while reciting diminishes one's lifespan. Therefore, silence is prescribed in all three [instances].

श्राद्ध यज्ञे विवाहे च दीक्षायामागते गुरौ । तिष्ठत क्षालनं कुर्यान्निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥१०१॥
During śrāddha, sacrifice, marriage, initiation, and when the guru arrives, one should perform the washing while standing; otherwise the ancestors depart disappointed.

तिष्ठन्प्रक्षालयेत्पादौ दैवे पित्र्ये च कर्मणि । देवा हविर्न गृह्णन्ति कव्यं च पितरस्तथा ।।१०२।।
One should wash the feet while standing during rites for the gods and ancestors. Otherwise, the gods do not accept the havis, nor do the ancestors accept the kavya.

--- Page 11 ---

मंडलस्योत्तरे भागे कुर्यादाचमनं बुधः । उत्तरे जाह्नवीतोयं अन्यत्र रुधिरं भवेत् ।।१०३।।
The wise person should perform ācamana in the northern part of the maṇḍala. In the north, the water is [regarded as] the water of the Jāhnavī; elsewhere, it becomes like blood.

मण्डलात्पूर्वतो देवा पितृविप्रैस्तथोत्तरे । कर्ता कुर्वीत ईशाने श्राद्ध आचमनं स्मृतम् ।।१०४।।
The gods are [placed] to the east of the maṇḍala, and the ancestors and Brāhmaṇas to the north. The performer should perform ācamana in the northeast; this is prescribed for śrāddha.

हस्तप्रक्षालनादूर्ध्व पाणिभ्यां पात्रधारणम् । संकल्पे दक्षिणे त्याज्यं भुत्क्त्वा वामं विमुत्सृजेत् ।।१०५।।
After washing the hands, the vessel should be held with both hands. During the saṅkalpa it should be released on the right side; after eating, it should be released on the left side.

ब्राह्मणानासनं वस्त्र' तिलमिश्र तथैव च । पितृश्नानि देवादि काष्ठासनानि वर्जयेत् ॥१०६।।
The seats and garments for the Brāhmaṇas, as well as those mixed with sesame, should be [properly arranged]. Wooden seats and the seats intended for the ancestors and gods should be avoided.

सव्यं तु देवमस्थानमर्चयेत्पश्चिमामुखम् । अपसव्यं पितृस्थानमर्चयेद्दक्षिणस्तथा ॥१०७॥
With the sacred thread worn in the normal position, one should worship the place of the gods while facing west. With the sacred thread in the apasavya position, one should worship the place of the ancestors while facing south.

श्राद्धरम्भेऽवसाने च पादशौचे तथार्चने । विकरे पिण्डदाने च षट्सु आचमनं स्मृतम् ।।१०८।।
Ācamana is prescribed on six occasions: at the beginning and conclusion of śrāddha, during foot-washing, during worship, during the distribution of food, and during the offering of the piṇḍas.

स्वागते स्वस्तिवचने गोत्रशेषे प्रदक्षिणे । अर्घ्य च दक्षिणादाने षट्सु सव्यं विधीयते ॥१०९॥
The normal sacred-thread position is prescribed on six occasions: at welcoming, while uttering auspicious words, at the conclusion of the gotra recitation, during circumambulation, while offering arghya, and while giving dakṣiṇā.

प्रातःकाले शुचिः स्नात्वा पाकनिष्पतितो यदा । गृह्णन्तु पितृकार्याणि मुनीनां सर्वतोद्विजः ।॥ ११०॥
In the morning, having bathed and become pure, when the cooking has been completed, the twice-born should undertake the rites for the ancestors, with the permission of the sages.

अपुत्रा म्रियते भर्तुः गोत्रजानाननाशयत् । स्त्रीणां च कुरुते श्राद्ध' पुत्राभावेति सर्वथा ।।१११।।
If a husband dies without a son, [the prescribed rites] should be performed without destroying the continuity of his gotra. In the absence of a son, śrāddha for the women should also be performed.

स्त्रीणां कुरुते श्राद्ध गोत्रमुच्चारणं कथम् । अमुकगोत्राय भर्तुश्च पिताप्रपितामहाय च ।। ११२।।
When performing śrāddha for women, how should the gotra be pronounced? [It should be stated] as: “For the woman of such-and-such gotra, and for her husband, father, and great-grandfather.”

उत्तरीयाभावे च वस्त्रं सव्यापसव्यकर्मणि । गोत्रनामस्वधाकारैः भतुः श्राद्धं तु कारयेत् ।।११३।।
In the absence of an upper garment, the garment should be used for the rites performed in the savya and apasavya positions. The husband's śrāddha should be performed with the recitation of the gotra, name, and svadhā formula.

--- Page 12 ---

अपुत्राम्रियते भार्या भर्ता कुर्याद्यथाविधि । गोत्रनामसमुच्चार्य सरस्वतीनाम चोत्तरे ॥११४।।
If a wife dies without a son, the husband should perform the rites according to the prescribed procedure, reciting her gotra and name, and thereafter the name of Sarasvatī.

प्रथमं सरस्वतीनाम्नी द्वितीयं गौतमी तथा । तृतीयं यमुनानाम्नी कुर्याच्छ्राद्धं सभर्तृकः ।॥११५॥
First, [the name] Sarasvatī; second, Gautamī; and third, Yamunā. The husband should perform the śrāddha accordingly.

पितामहा च वर्तते पिता च म्रियते यदि । द्वौ पिण्डौ चैकनामानौ एकं तु प्रपितामहे ॥ ११६।।
If the grandfather is living and the father dies, two piṇḍas should be offered under one name, and one [piṇḍa] to the great-grandfather.

अपुत्रस्यपितृव्यस्य ज्येष्ठस्य भ्रातुरेव च । कुर्यात्त्रिपुरुषं श्राद्ध एकोद्दिष्ट' कदाचन ॥११७॥
For a paternal uncle who died without a son, and likewise for an elder brother, one should perform śrāddha for three generations; the ekoddiṣṭa śrāddha should be performed when prescribed.

आसनावाहनौ चैव द्विजांगुष्ठस्तथैव च । अध्यं गन्धानुसंकल्पं दैवपूर्वाणि षट्सु च ॥११८।।
The offering of the seat, invocation, the touching with the Brāhmaṇa's thumb, arghya, fragrance, and saṅkalpa—these six are performed first for the gods.

विप्रप्रदक्षिणा याच्या जपासि स्वस्तिवाचनम् । श्राद्ध' च दक्षिणादानं षट्सव्यं च प्रचक्षते ॥११९।।
Circumambulation of the Brāhmaṇas, [the prescribed] request, japa, auspicious recitation, śrāddha, and the giving of dakṣiṇā—these six are said to be performed in the savya manner.

अपसव्येत्यनुज्ञातः सव्येनैव तु होमयेत् । दीयते ॥१२०॥ अपसव्यं पुनः कृत्वा पितृपात्रेषु ॥१२०।।
After receiving permission in the apasavya position, one should make the oblation in the savya position. [The offering] is given; then one should again assume the apasavya position for the vessels of the ancestors.

कुशेत्रूत्तानपाणिस्तु आहुती द्व घृताप्लुते । शेषं देवाय दातव्यं पितृभ्यस्तदनंतरम् ॥१२१॥
With the palm turned upward and kuśa grass [held appropriately], two oblations saturated with ghee should be offered. The remainder should first be given to the gods and thereafter to the ancestors.

सव्येपृच्छत्यनुज्ञातो स्वल्पं च जुहुते हविः । साग्निरग्निमुखेदद्यान्निरग्निर्द्विजपाणये ।।१२२।।
After receiving permission in the savya position, he should ask [for permission] and offer a small portion of the oblation. One who maintains the sacred fire should offer it into the fire; one without fire should offer it into the hand of a Brāhmaṇa.

साग्निकैरग्निपूर्व तु पितृपूर्वमनग्निकैः । अग्नौकरणशेषं तु विश्वेदेवाय हूयते ॥१२३।।
Those who maintain the sacred fire should perform the rite with the fire first, while those without fire should perform it with the ancestors first. The remainder of the Agnikaraṇa offering is offered to the Viśvedevas.

निरग्निरग्न्नौकरणं कुर्यान्मुख्ये च पैतृके । तदन्नं देवायदातव्यं पितॄणां तदनन्तरं ॥१२४॥
One without the sacred fire should perform the Agnikaraṇa rite in the principal ancestral ceremony. That food should be offered to the gods, and thereafter to the ancestors.

--- Page 13 ---

अग्नौकरण शेषं तु पितृपात्रेषु दीयते । प्रतिपाद्यपितॄणां तु नो दद्याद्धं श्वदेविके ॥१२५॥
The remainder of the Agnikaraṇa offering is placed in the vessels of the ancestors. It should not be given to the ancestors who have already been offered their due, nor should it be given in the Śvadevika rite.

यत्तुपाणितले दत्तं पूर्वमश्रयं (१) तु सिद्धयः । पितरस्तन्न गृह्णति शेषान्नं न लभन्ति च ॥१२६॥
Whatever food is first placed in the palm [as an offering] becomes the means of accomplishment. The ancestors do not accept it [if improperly offered], and they do not receive the remaining food either.

अघ्यपात्रस्थिता दर्भाः ब्राह्मणो ज्ञानदुर्बलः । स्वयं गृह्णन् क्षिपेद्यस्तु स भवेत्पितृघातकः ॥१२७॥
If a Brāhmaṇa who is deficient in knowledge himself takes the kuśa grass placed in the arghya vessel and throws it away, he is regarded as one who harms the ancestors.

पाणौ होमस्य ये दर्भा पात्राधस्तु विनिक्षिपेत् । पुनरग्नो च तान्‌हुत्वा दहंति पितरस्तथा ॥१२८।।
The kuśa grass used in the hand during the homa should be placed beneath the vessel. If it is then offered again into the fire, the ancestors are thereby burned.

न जीवत्पितृकः कुर्याच्छ्राद्ध मातृक्षयादृते । क्रान्ते च नवमी श्राद्ध ं मृते चैव विलुप्यते ॥ १२९॥
One whose father is living should not perform śrāddha, except for the death of his mother. When the ninth lunar day has passed, the śrāddha is discontinued, and upon death it likewise ceases.

न छायां भार्गवे दीने मातापित्रोःक्षयेऽहनि । तिलैस्तु तपणं कुर्यात् पितृहासोऽपि जायते ॥१३०।।
On Friday, and on the day of the death of one's mother or father, one should not offer [their] shadow [or associated rite]. One should perform tarpaṇa with sesame; otherwise, there is also a loss of the ancestral benefit.

कन्यायां तु गते भानौ पितरो यान्धि स्वं गृहम् ! पितृलोकं परित्यज्य यावद् श्चिकदशनात् ।।१३१॥
When the Sun enters Virgo, the ancestors come to their own homes, leaving the ancestral world, until the time of the scorpion's bite.

चन्दनागरुकर्पूरं कुंकुमं च प्रदापयेत् । अश्वमेधफलं तस्य पितॄणां च विलेपनम् ॥१३२॥
One should offer sandalwood, agaru, camphor, and kuṅkuma. The anointing of the ancestors with these is said to yield the merit of an Aśvamedha sacrifice.

रविशुक्रत्रयोदश्यां सप्तम्यां निशिसंध्ययोः । तिलतर्पणसंयोगात्तज्जलं रुधिरं भवेत् ॥१३३॥
On Sunday, Friday, the thirteenth lunar day, the seventh lunar day, and at night or twilight, water offered together with sesame in tarpaṇa becomes blood.

क्षयाहे पातसंक्रान्ते ग्रहणे शशिभास्करे । न वारतिथिदोषो न कुर्याञ्चतिलतर्पणं ॥१३४॥
On the day of the lunar decline, at a saṅkrānti, and during an eclipse of the Moon or Sun, there is no defect arising from the weekday or lunar day; one should nevertheless not perform sesame tarpaṇa.

घृतं गुग्गुलु धूपं च पितॄणां यः प्रयच्छति । अश्वमेध फलं तस्य धूपदानस्तथैव च ॥१३५॥
Whoever offers ghee and gugguḷu incense to the ancestors obtains the merit of an Aśvamedha sacrifice; the offering of incense likewise yields [that merit].

--- Page 14 ---

आवाहनान्नौकरणं विकरं पात्रपूरणम् । तृप्तिप्रश्नं न कुर्वीत आमे होमे कथंचन ।॥१३६॥
One should not perform the invocation, Agnikaraṇa, offering of the vikara, filling of the vessels, or the inquiry concerning satisfaction while the homa is still unprepared, under any circumstances.

मातापित्रोरेकदिवसे पृष्ट्वा पाकं प्रयत्नतः । प्रथमं पितृकार्याणि द्वितीयं मातरस्तथा ।।१३७॥
When the śrāddha for the mother and father falls on the same day, the cooking should be undertaken carefully. First, the rites for the father should be performed, and thereafter those for the mother.

अग्नौकरणमेकं स्यात् पिंडदानस्तथैव च। त्रयं त्रयं च पिंडानां मातापित्रोः क्षयेऽहनि ॥१३८।।
There should be one Agnikaraṇa and likewise one piṇḍa offering; on the death anniversaries of the mother and father, three piṇḍas each should be offered.

यद्य ककर्तृ कं श्राद्धमनेकोऽपि विधीयते । वैश्वदेवे न तंत्रंस्यात् पृथक् पाको न विद्यते ॥ १३९॥
Even if śrāddha is prescribed for several persons, there should be no separate procedure for the Vaiśvadeva rite; there should not be separate cooking.

असंकल्पितं च पश्चान्नं पाणिना स्पर्शते यदि । त्रयस्ते नरकं यान्ति दाता भोक्ता च पूर्वजाः ॥१४०।।
If food that has not been consecrated by saṅkalpa is subsequently touched by the hand, three persons—the giver, the eater, and the ancestors—go to hell.

मृण्मयेषु पात्रेषु मृत्तिका चन्दनेन वा। घृतेनैव कृतं धूपं निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥१४१॥
If, in earthen vessels, incense is made merely with clay or sandalwood, or if incense is made only with ghee, the ancestors depart disappointed.

भोजनोत्तिष्ठ (च्छिष्ट) पात्रे च स्वस्ति कुर्वन्ति ये द्विजाः । भ्रमन्ति पितरस्तेषां षण्मासोच्छिष्टभोजिनः ।।१४२।।
Those Brāhmaṇas who pronounce auspicious words while rising from the meal, [with] the remnants in the vessels, cause their ancestors to wander about; those ancestors become eaters of leftovers for six months.

अकृत्वा भस्ममर्यादां यः कुर्यात्पाणिशोधनम् । आसुरं तद्भवेच्छ्राद्ध पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥१४३॥
Whoever cleanses his hands without first making the prescribed boundary with sacred ash makes the śrāddha demonic in nature; it does not reach the ancestors.

माषाः सर्वत्रयोज्याः स्युः पितृपिंडेषु वर्जयेत् । ब्राह्मणानां यथा मद्यं तथामाषान्नपिंडयोः ॥१४४॥
Black gram may be used generally, but it should be avoided in the piṇḍas offered to the ancestors. For Brāhmaṇas, black gram in food and piṇḍas is regarded like liquor.

पूर्वमापोशनं ग्राह्य पिंडदानं तथैव च । कुर्याद्व मातृकं श्राद्धं नरक्यां सहितो सुतः ॥ १४५।।
First, the āpośana should be received, and likewise the piṇḍa offering should be made. The son should perform the maternal śrāddha together with the [rite for those in] Naraka.

विकरं निक्षिपेद्भूमौ ब्राह्मणानामनुज्ञया । कुर्याल्पिडं तत्सुतानां नरक्यां ब्राह्मणो भवेत् ।।१४६।।
With the permission of the Brāhmaṇas, the vikara should be placed upon the ground. If one makes a piṇḍa for those sons [as prescribed], the Brāhmaṇa becomes associated with Naraka.

--- Page 15 ---

हस्तप्रक्षालनादूवं द्वौ हस्तौ पात्रधारिणौ । आपोशाने दक्षिणंत्याज्यं भोजनान्ते वाममुत्सृजेत् ।।१४७।।
After washing the hands, both hands should be used for holding the vessels. During āpośana, the right hand should be released, and after the meal the left hand should be released.

अपोशनिक्षिपेत्पाणौ पिंडदानं तथैव च। यजुः शाखा तु देवानां पितॄणां प्रीतिवद्ध नम् ।।१४८।।
The āpośana should be placed in the hand, and likewise the piṇḍa offering should be performed. The Yajurveda branch is regarded as pleasing to the gods and the ancestors.

यजुः शाखा पूर्वतो पिण्डं ऋक्शाखा तु दक्षिणम् । सामवेदस्तु भोज्यं च श्राद्ध ं तु कुरुते यदा ।।१४९।।
When performing śrāddha, the piṇḍa of the Yajurveda branch should be placed in the east, that of the Ṛgveda branch in the south, and the food associated with the Sāmaveda should be [offered accordingly].

वस्त्रयुग्मं ततोदद्यादेकैकं वा पृथक् पृथक् । आशाया दीयते चाल्षं किंचिच्छत्क्त्यानुसारतः ।।१५०।।
Thereafter, a pair of garments should be given, or each garment may be given separately. Something should also be given according to one's means and capacity.

पूर्ववद् विकरेद् भूमौ पिंडदानं तथैव च । कुर्याच्छ्राद्धविधिं तस्य निराशाः पितरोगताः ।।१५१।।
As before, the vikara should be placed upon the ground, and the piṇḍa offering should likewise be performed. If the śrāddha procedure is not performed properly, the ancestors depart disappointed.

मार्जनं तर्पणं श्राद्धं न कुर्याद्वारिधारया । मोहाद्वा कुरुते यस्तु स विप्रो नरकं व्रजेत् ।।१५२।।
One should not perform mārjana, tarpaṇa, or śrāddha by means of a continuous stream of water. A Brāhmaṇa who does so out of delusion goes to hell.

उष्णोदकं वृथास्नानं वृथा जाप्यमवैदिकम् । मूर्खस्य तु वृथादानं वृथाश्राद्धमदक्षिणम् ।।१५३।।
Bathing with hot water is fruitless, as is a useless bath, and japa that is contrary to the Veda is fruitless. For a foolish person, giving charity is fruitless, and śrāddha performed without dakṣiṇā is fruitless.

दशकृत्वः पिवेदापः गायत्र्याः श्राद्धभुद्विजः । ततः संध्यामुपासीत तज्जपाज्जुहुयादपि ।।१५४।।
The Brāhmaṇa who has performed śrāddha should drink water ten times with the Gāyatrī. Thereafter, he should perform the Sandhyā worship and, through its japa, should also perform the homa.

दन्तधावन ताम्बूलं स्नेहस्नानमभोजनम् । रसौषध परान्नं च श्राद्धकृत्सप्त वर्जयेत् ॥१५५।।
One who has performed śrāddha should avoid seven things: brushing the teeth, chewing betel, an oil bath, fasting, medicinal preparations, and food prepared by another.

पुनर्भोजनमध्वानं भाराध्ययनमैथुनम् । दानं प्रतिग्रहो होमः श्राद्धभुगष्टवर्जयेत् ।।१५६।।
One who has eaten at a śrāddha should avoid eight things: eating again, travelling, carrying burdens, studying, sexual intercourse, giving gifts, accepting gifts, and performing homa.

पितृक्षये अमावास्यां मंथानं कुरुते यदि । घृतं गोमांसवत्प्रोक्त तक्र' चापि सुरासमम् ।।१५७।।
If one performs the manthana rite on the new-moon day of the ancestors' death anniversary, the ghee is said to be equivalent to beef, and the buttermilk likewise to liquor.

--- Page 16 ---

दृद्धितक्रकणाभिक्षा लवणं व्यञ्जनाद्यः । सुविरोग्निर्नदातव्यं यावत्पिडान्ननिर्वपेत् ॥१५८॥
One should not give curd, buttermilk, grains, alms, salt, or other preparations, nor should one offer the sacred fire, until the piṇḍa food has been placed.

भागिनेयं भगिनीभर्ता दौहित्रं दुहितापतिः । प्रत्यासनमतिक्रान्तं मुनिदत्तं विनाभवेत् ॥१५९॥
The sister's son, sister's husband, daughter's son, and daughter's husband are each assigned a particular place of precedence; beyond that prescribed order, the arrangement is not to be made without the permission of the sage.

भागिनेयं दशविप्रेषु दौहित्रः शतमुच्यते । भगिनीभर्ता सहस्रषु अनन्तं दुहितापतिः ॥१६०।।
Among ten Brāhmaṇas, the sister's son is [regarded as equivalent to one]; the daughter's son is said to be [equivalent to] a hundred, the sister's husband to a thousand, and the daughter's husband to an unlimited number.

वेदपूर्ण मुखं विप्रं समुक्तमपि भोजयेत् । न तु मूर्ख निराहारं षड्रात्रञ्श्चोपवासिनम् ।।१६१॥
One should feed a Brāhmaṇa whose mouth is filled with the knowledge of the Veda, even if he has been liberated [from some obligation]; but one should not feed a foolish person merely because he has fasted for six nights.

स्वगोत्रे प्रवरेभिन्ने विधुरे ग्राम याचके । पितुः श्राद्ध न कुर्वीत पतिभ्रात्रा सहोदरा ॥१६२॥
One should not perform the father's śrāddha for a person of a different pravara within one's own gotra, for a widower, for a village beggar, or for a sister together with her husband's brother.

अपुत्रको पशुश्चैव व्याधितोल्पायुरेव च । वृत्तिहीनश्च मूर्खश्च जन्मे जन्मे भविष्यति ॥१६३॥
He will be without sons, like an animal; afflicted with disease and short-lived; without livelihood and foolish, birth after birth.

काले कर्म प्रकुर्वीत काले तिष्ठन्ति देवताः । वरमेकाहुतिः काले नाकाले कोटिसंख्यया ॥१६४।।
One should perform rites at the proper time, for the deities abide in their appointed time. One offering made at the proper time is better than millions made at an improper time.

अकाले कुरुते कम काले प्राप्त न कारयेत् । कालातीतं तु यत्कर्म अकृतं तं विनिर्दिशेत् ॥ १६५॥
One should not perform a rite at an improper time, nor should one fail to perform it when the proper time arrives. A rite whose proper time has passed is regarded as one that has not been performed.

अपेक्षितं यो न दद्यात् श्राद्धार्थमुपकल्पितम् । कृपणो मन्दबुद्धिस्तु न तच्छ्राद्धफलं लभेत् ॥१६६॥
Whoever does not give what is required and has been prepared for the śrāddha, being miserly and dull-minded, does not obtain the fruit of that śrāddha.

भोजनं कदलीपत्रे वामभागाग्रमाहितः । अग्रं चेदक्षिणेभागे भुत्क्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ॥१६७॥
The meal should be taken on a banana leaf with its tip directed toward the left. If the tip is directed toward the right, after eating one should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance.

नित्यश्राद्धषु तीर्थेषु भोजनं बलिपूर्वकम् । अन्यश्राद्धषु सर्वेषु न बलिं नैव चाहुतिं ॥१६८॥
At daily śrāddhas and at sacred pilgrimage places, food should be served after making the bali offering. In all other śrāddhas, neither bali nor āhuti should be offered.

--- Page 17 ---

आत्ममातामही पत्नी दुहिता च स्वंसा तथा । पितृष्वसा मातृभगिनीत्येते वै सप्त गोत्रजाः ॥१६९॥
The paternal grandmother, wife, daughter, sister, paternal aunt, and maternal aunt—these are said to be the seven gotra-related women.

मृत्तिका गोशकृद्दभांनुपवीतं दत्त्वा गुणाढ्यविप्राय कुलजाय तथोत्तराम् । तथोत्तरे ॥१७०॥
Having given clay, cow dung, darbha grass, and the sacred thread to a virtuous Brāhmaṇa belonging to the family, one should likewise give the prescribed upper garment.

अग्नौकरं तु देवस्य पितृव्या द्विजतर्पणे । मानसात्पिण्डदानाञ्च नरः क्रियाद्विकरेण तु ॥१७१॥
For the gods, the Agnikaraṇa should be performed; for the satisfaction of the ancestors, and for the mental offering of piṇḍas, a person should perform the vikara according to the prescribed procedure.

एक पंक्त्त्युपविष्टानां ब्राह्मणानां श्राद्धकर्मणि । भक्ष्यं भोज्यं समं देयं दक्षिणात्वनुसारतः ॥१७२॥
When Brāhmaṇas are seated in a single row during the śrāddha rite, the edible and prepared foods should be given equally, while the dakṣiṇā should be given according to one's means.

पिंडदानं च यजुषां वहुचां द्विजतर्पणम् । श्राद्धशब्दाभिधेयं स्यादुभयं सामगायिनाम् ॥१७३।।
The piṇḍa offering is associated with the followers of the Yajurveda, the satisfaction of the Brāhmaṇas with the followers of the Ṛgveda, while among the singers of the Sāmaveda both are designated by the term śrāddha.

स्वशाखोक्त परित्यज्य परशाखोक्त' समाचरेत् । अप्रामाण्यमृषि कृत्वा-अंधं तमसि मज्जति ॥१७४॥
If one abandons the practices prescribed by one's own Vedic branch and follows those prescribed by another branch, disregarding the authority of the ṛṣi, one sinks into blind darkness.

अनग्निब्रह्मचारी च स्त्री च नैव च नैव च । चालयेत्पिडपात्राणि स्वयं शिष्योऽथवा सुतः ॥१७५॥
A Brahmacārin without sacred fire and a woman should not move the vessels containing the piṇḍas; they should be moved by the disciple or by the son himself.

लेपभागश्चतुर्थाद्याः पित्राद्याः पिण्डभागिनः । पिंडदः सप्तमस्तेषां सापिण्ड्य सप्तपूरुषम् ॥१७६।।
Beginning with the fourth, the ancestors are entitled to the share of the remnants; the father and the other ancestors are recipients of the piṇḍas. The giver of the piṇḍa is the seventh, and the relationship of sapinda extends to seven generations.

यच्च पाणितले दत्तं (१) पूर्वमबुद्धयः । निराशा पितरो यान्ति शेषमन्नं लभन्ति ते ।।१७७॥
Whatever is first given upon the palm through ignorance, the ancestors depart disappointed; they receive only the remaining food.

केतकी द्यूतकी चैव बर्बरी करवीरकैः । जातिदर्शनमात्रेण निराशाः पितरो गताः ॥१७८॥
By the mere presence of ketakī, dyūtaki, barbarī, and karavīra flowers, the ancestors depart disappointed.

कूष्मांडं महिषीक्षीरं आढक्या राजसर्षपाः । मसूराश्चणकाश्चैव षडेते श्राद्धघातकाः ॥१७९॥
Pumpkin, buffalo's milk, āḍhakī, red mustard, lentils, and chickpeas—these six are said to destroy the efficacy of śrāddha.


--- Page 18 ---

आचान्तोप्यशुचिस्तावत् यावत्पात्रमनुद्ध तम् । उद्ध तोप्यशुचिस्तावत् यावन्नोन्मृज्यते मही ।।१८०।।
Even one who has performed ācamana remains impure as long as the vessel has not been lifted; even after it has been lifted, he remains impure until the ground has been wiped clean.

गृहेऽपि शिशुदेवानां यतीनां ब्रह्मचारिणाम् । श्राद्धपाको न दातव्यो यावत्पिडान्नन्निवेयेत् ॥१८१॥
Even in the house, food prepared for śrāddha should not be given to children, deities, ascetics, or Brahmacārins until the food for the piṇḍas has been offered.

शिखामात्रं तथापिंडान्पूर्व पश्चिमतोनयेत् । अनेनविधिना काय पितॄणां त्तमक्षयम् ।।१८२।।
The piṇḍas should likewise be moved from east to west, leaving only the portion corresponding to the śikhā. By this procedure, the offering to the ancestors becomes imperishable.

वह्नचे भोजयेच्छाद्ध पितृस्थानेषु सर्वदा । श्रोत्रियं च गुणाढ्य च पितृख्गातकुलं तथा ।।१८३॥
At the places designated for the ancestors, one should always feed a śrotriya who is endowed with virtues and belongs to a family worthy of the ancestors.

वह्नच भोजयेच्छ्राद्ध याजुषैः सामगैस्तथा । अक्षयं तद्भवेच्छाद्ध व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ।।१८४।।
One should perform the śrāddha by feeding followers of the Yajurveda and Sāmaveda. According to the teaching of Vyāghra, such śrāddha becomes imperishable.

वह्नचे तु परित्यज्य श्राद्धकर्मणि यो द्विजः । निष्फलं तद्भवेच्छ्राद्ध पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठते ।।१८५।।
But if a Brāhmaṇa performing the śrāddha rite abandons the prescribed fire-related procedure, that śrāddha becomes fruitless and does not reach the ancestors.

वह्वर्चेन विनाश्राद्ध ये कुर्वन्त्यन्यशाखिनः । अज्ञानात्कुरुते श्राद्ध पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥१८६॥
Those of other Vedic branches who perform śrāddha without the prescribed Bahvṛca procedure, or who perform it through ignorance, do not cause the śrāddha to reach the ancestors.

द्वौ दैवाथवेणौ विप्रौ ऋग्यजुः सामवेदिनः । क्रमाच्छाद्ध नियुक्त च व्याघ्रम्य वचनं यथा ।।१८७।।
For the divine portion, two Brāhmaṇas should be appointed, learned respectively in the Ṛgveda, Yajurveda, and Sāmaveda, according to the prescribed order, as stated by Vyāghra.

अथवा द्वौ विश्वेदेवौ बह्वचं पितरस्तथा । यजुषं पितामहं ज्ञेयं सार्मध्यात् प्रपितामहम् ।।१८८।।
Alternatively, two Brāhmaṇas may represent the Viśvedevas; a Bahvṛca should be regarded as representing the father, a follower of the Yajurveda as representing the grandfather, and a Sāmaveda scholar as representing the great-grandfather.

अनेन विधिना श्राद्ध ं कृतमक्षय्यतां ब्रजेत् । उक्तलक्षणकं न स्यात् स्वशाखं भोजयेत्ततः ॥१८९॥
Śrāddha performed according to this procedure becomes imperishable. If the persons possessing the stated qualifications are not available, one should then feed a Brāhmaṇa belonging to one's own Vedic branch.

बह्नचे यजुषं चैव सामगं च गुणान्वितम् । अहंकारेण संत्यक्त्त्वा श्राद्धकृन्निष्फलं भवेत् ।।१९०।।
If one abandons the Bahvṛca, Yajurveda, and Sāmaveda scholars who are endowed with virtues because of pride, the person performing the śrāddha obtains no fruit from it.

--- Page 19 ---

उच्छिष्टशवचाण्डालनखं च खरकाकयोः । चन्द्रसूर्यग्रहे चैव स्नानं कुर्यादमंत्रकम् ॥१९१।।
After contact with remnants, a corpse, a Caṇḍāla, the nails of a donkey or crow, and during a lunar or solar eclipse, one should bathe without reciting mantras.

अपत्नीके प्रवासे च यस्य भार्या रजस्वला । आमश्राद्ध प्रकुर्वीत वर्जयित्वाक्षयेऽहनि ॥ १९२॥
If a man's wife is absent or is menstruating while he is away from home, he should perform the śrāddha with uncooked food, except on the day of the annual death rite.

वृद्धावादौ क्षयेचान्ते मध्येजुह्वति पर्वणि । पितृपक्षे तथाचान्ते वैश्वदेवो विधीयते ॥१९३॥
At the beginning of the increase, at the end of the waning, in the middle at the sacred parvan, and likewise at the end of the Pitṛpakṣa, the Vaiśvadeva rite is prescribed.

बोदने परमान्ने वा द्रोणमासाद्य मूढ़धीः । तत्पात्रं पूरयेद्धृतं तद्धृतं रुधिरं भवेत् ॥१९४।।
If a foolish person fills a vessel with ghee after placing it on a measure of rice or a preparation of fine food, that ghee becomes like blood.

दशमीद्वादशीश्राद्ध अमापूर्णा तु संक्रमे । अस्ते नक्त तु यो भुंक्त भुक्त्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ।।१९५।।
If one eats at night after performing a śrāddha on the tenth or twelfth day, on the full or new moon, or during a solar transition, one should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance after eating.

अग्निना भस्मनावापि स्तंबेन सलिलेन वा। द्वारस्य चोपमार्गेण पंक्तिदोषो न विद्यते ॥१९६॥
There is no defect in the row of those eating when it is separated by fire, ashes, a post, water, or by the passageway at the doorway.

तिलकेन विनाविप्रो पुण्यस्त्री कुकुमं विना । द्वावेतौ गर्हितौलोके दैवेपित्र्ये च कर्मणि ॥१९७।।
A Brāhmaṇa without a tilaka and a virtuous woman without kuṅkuma are both regarded as blameworthy in the world during rites for the gods and ancestors.

यागं दानं च योगं च म्वाध्यायं पितृतर्पणम् । भस्मीभवति तत्सर्वमूर्ध्वपुण्ड्र विना कृतम् ।।१९८।।
Sacrifice, charity, yoga, Vedic study, and offerings to the ancestors—all of these become fruitless when performed without the ūrdhva-puṇḍra.

विना यज्ञोपवीतेन विना वद्धशिखेन च। विशेषोद्य पवीतेन यत्कृतं नैव तत्कृतम् ॥१९९।।
Whatever is done without the sacred thread and without the properly bound śikhā, and without wearing the sacred thread in the prescribed manner, is regarded as not having been done.

पूर्वतो सर्वदेवाश्च दक्षिणे पितरस्तथा । तस्मात्सर्वप्रयत्ने न वामे गंडूषमुत्सृजेत् ॥ २००॥
All the deities are situated in the east and the ancestors in the south; therefore, one should carefully avoid releasing the water from the mouth on the left side.

हस्तपात्रे च धौते च क्रियते पंक्तिवारणम् । प्रागुदीची विवाहे च प्रतीची दक्षिणस्तथा ॥२०१॥
When the hand and vessel have been washed, the row is to be properly separated. At a marriage, the prescribed directions are east and north; in the other rites, west and south.

--- Page 20 ---

आमंत्रितो जपेद्दोग्ध्रीं नियुक्तस्तु निषंगिणः । उत्थायवामदेव्यं तु श्राद्धदौषैर्न लिप्यते ॥ २०२॥
One who has been invited should recite the prescribed hymn to the milch cow, while one who has been appointed should recite the Niṣaṅgi hymn; rising, he should recite the Vāmadevya hymn, and he is not tainted by the defects of the śrāddha.

कन्यादानं पिंडदानं विप्राणों पादसिंचनम् । आसन्नायां च भार्यायां केवलेन कृतं वृथा ॥२०३।।
The giving away of a daughter, the offering of piṇḍas, and the washing of the feet of Brāhmaṇas, when performed alone while the wife is present, are fruitless.

भतृणा च हता नारी साहंकारा तथैव च । तस्या हस्तान्नभु जीत श्राद्धकालेषु वर्जयेत् ॥२०४।।
A woman who has been abandoned by her husband and is likewise filled with pride should be avoided; one should not eat food from her hands during śrāddha rites.

अनाश्रमी तु यः स्तेयो द्विजरूपधरस्तथा । तस्मै श्राद्धानि यो दद्याद्राक्षसेभ्यः प्रयच्छवि ।।२०५॥
A thief who does not belong to any āśrama yet assumes the appearance of a twice-born should not be given śrāddha offerings; one who gives śrāddha to such a person is said to offer it to demons.

घृतहीनं तु योऽधीते (भुङ्क्त) नरस्त्वाहुतिपंचकम् । पश्चाद् घृतं तु यो भुक्त द्विजश्चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ।।२०६।।
If a man studies or eats without ghee after the five offerings have been made, and a twice-born person subsequently eats ghee, he should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance.

इक्षुरापः पयोमूलं फलं ताम्बूलमौषधम् । भक्षयित्वाऽपि कर्तव्यं देवाग्निपितृतर्पणम् ।।२०७।।
Even after consuming sugarcane, water, milk, roots, fruits, betel, or medicinal substances, one should perform the worship and offerings to the gods, sacred fire, and ancestors.

गुरुरग्निद्विजातीनां वर्णानां ब्राह्मणो गुरुः । गुरुरेवपतिः स्त्रीणां सर्वस्याभ्यागतो गुरुः ॥२०८।।
The sacred fire is the guru of the twice-born; the Brāhmaṇa is the guru of the varṇas; the husband is the guru of women; and a guest is the guru of everyone.

सर्वमन्नमुपादाय सतिलं दक्षिणामुखम् । उच्छिष्ट्रसन्निधौपिण्डं दद्याद्वं पितृयज्ञवत् ॥२०९॥
Taking all the food together with sesame and facing south, one should offer the piṇḍa near the remnants of food, according to the manner of the ancestral sacrifice.

पांदप्रक्षालनादृध्वं यावद्विप्रविसर्जनम् । तावच्छ्राद्धं प्रकुर्वीत नाशौचं न च सूतकम् ॥२१०।।
From the washing of the feet until the dismissal of the Brāhmaṇas, the śrāddha should be continued; during this period, neither impurity due to death nor impurity due to birth is considered.

यजुषां पिंडदाने तु माषान्नं यः परित्यजेत् । स वै नरकमाप्नोति निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥२११॥
In the piṇḍa offering according to the Yajurveda tradition, whoever omits food prepared with māṣa causes the ancestors to depart disappointed and himself attains hell.

प्रागादिप्रत्यर्गतस्य इति वाज़सनेयिनां । उद्गादि दक्षिणान्तं दैवेपित्र्ये च कर्मणि ॥ २१२॥
For the Vājasaneyins, the prescribed arrangement proceeds from the east and returns accordingly; in rites for the gods and ancestors, it proceeds from the direction beginning with the north and ends in the south.


--- Page 21 ---

एकालिंगे करे तिस्र उभयोर्मृद्वयं स्मृतम् । पंचापाने दशैकस्मिन् उभयोः सप्त मृत्तिका ॥२१३॥
For cleansing one organ, three applications of clay to the hand are prescribed, and two when both are involved; five for the anus, ten for one [hand], and seven when both are involved.

एतच्छौचं गृहस्थस्य द्विगुणं ब्रह्मचारिणाम् । वानप्रस्थस्य त्रिगुणं यतीनां च चतुगु णम् ॥२१४॥
This cleansing is prescribed for a householder; it is to be twice as much for a Brahmacārin, three times as much for a forest-dweller, and four times as much for an ascetic.

संध्याहीनोऽशुनित्यमनर्हः सर्वकर्मसु । इह जन्मनि शूद्रत्वं मृते श्वानोऽभिजायते ॥२१५।।
One who neglects the Sandhyā is perpetually impure and unfit for all rites; in this life he becomes a Śūdra, and after death he is born as a dog.

उष्णोदकेन सप्ताहं द्विजः शूद्रत्वमाप्नुयात् । उष्णोदकैवृथा स्नानं वृथाजाव्यमवैदिकम् ॥२१६॥
A twice-born who bathes with hot water for seven days becomes a Śūdra. Bathing uselessly with hot water and reciting non-Vedic prayers are fruitless.

अश्रोत्रिये वृथादानं वृथाश्राद्धमदक्षिणम् । असामर्थ्याच्छरीरस्य वैदिकं श्रुत्वा दृष्ट्वास्पृष्ट्वा प्रभाषितम् ।।२१७।|
Giving gifts to one who is not learned in the Veda is fruitless, as is a śrāddha performed without a proper dakṣiṇā. Because of bodily incapacity, what is heard, seen, touched, or spoken concerning Vedic rites [is subject to the prescribed restrictions].

संध्याविनाशयेज्जप्यं तत्सर्वं निष्फलं भवेत् । उल्लंघयति संध्यां यः स याति नरकं ध्रुवम् ।।२१८।।
If the Sandhyā is neglected, all recitation becomes fruitless. Whoever transgresses the Sandhyā certainly goes to hell.

तस्मान्न लंघयेत्संध्यां सायंप्रातर्द्विजः सदा । अकृत्वा वैश्वदेवं तु भुजंते ये द्विजाधमाः ॥२१९।।
Therefore, a twice-born should never neglect the evening and morning Sandhyā. Those inferior twice-born who eat without performing the Vaiśvadeva rite become [unworthy].

वृथा तेनान्नपानेन काकयोनि व्रजन्ति ते । कृत्वालं पादशौचं विमलमथजलं त्रिः पिबेदुन्मृजेद्विःतर्जन्यंगुष्ठयुग्मात्सजलमभिमृशेन्नासिकारन्ध्रयुग्मं ।।
By consuming such food and drink without the prescribed rite, they enter the womb of a crow. Having properly washed the feet, one should drink pure water three times, wipe the mouth twice, touch the two nostrils with the moistened index-finger-and-thumb pair, …

अंगुष्ठानामिकाभ्यां नयनयुगयुतं कर्णयुग्मं कनिष्ठांगुष्ठाभ्यां नाभिदेशं हृदयमथतलेनांगुलीभिः शिरोंसौ ॥२२०||
… touch the two eyes with the thumb and ring finger, the two ears with the little finger and thumb, the navel with the thumb and little finger, the heart with the palm, and the head with the fingers.

श्मशाने शूद्रसंपर्क चांडालादि प्रदर्शने । रोदने व्याकुले देशे न पठेत महालये ॥२२१।।
One should not recite [the prescribed texts] in a cremation ground, upon contact with a Śūdra, on seeing a Caṇḍāla or similar person, in a place filled with weeping and distress, or during the Mahālaya.

--- Page 22 ---

स्वयं वा पच्यते पाकः पत्नी वा पच्यते यदि । पुत्रेण पच्यते पाकः स्वयंपाकः स उच्यते ।।२२२।।
If the food is cooked by oneself, or if it is cooked by the wife, or if it is cooked by the son, it is called self-cooked food.

मातृपाकं तु भुजीयात् स्त्रीपाकं तु विशेषतः । आत्मपाकं पवित्रं च व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ॥२२३।।
One may eat food prepared by the mother, and especially food prepared by the wife; but food prepared by oneself is considered pure, according to the teaching of Vyāghra.

यदि भार्या अशक्त न श्राद्धपाकेषु कारिणम् । दृष्टिपूतः समंतोयं दरिद्रमजलं यथा ।।२२४।।
If the wife is unable to prepare the śrāddha food, one should not have it prepared [by an unsuitable person]; all water should be regarded as purified by proper inspection, just as water is regarded by the poor.

न कन्या क्रियतेपाकं न पाकं चान्यगोत्रजाः । विधवा च तथा वंध्या गर्भस्रावी च दुर्मुखी ॥२२५।।
A daughter should not prepare the food, nor should a woman belonging to another gotra; likewise, a widow, a barren woman, a woman who has miscarried, and a woman of ill speech should not prepare it.

एताः पाकं न भुजीत पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति । श्राद्धान्नपाके विधवापरस्त्री न वितृप्यते ये पितरो न देवाः ॥२२६।।
One should not eat food prepared by these women; the ancestors do not accept it. When śrāddha food is prepared by a widow or another man's wife, the ancestors are not satisfied, nor are the gods.

नोदके नैव चाज्येन नान्नेनैव कदाचन । चित्राहुतिवलिं चैव न कुर्याच्छ्राद्धभुन्द्विजः ॥२२७।।
A twice-born who partakes of śrāddha should never perform the offering with water, ghee, or food in this manner, nor should he make a painted offering or bali.

तीर्थयात्राविवाहेषु संग्रामे देवतालये । उपनीतोत्सर्जनेषु स्पृष्टास्पृष्ट न विद्यते ।।२२८।।
During pilgrimage, marriage, battle, in a temple of the gods, and during the commencement or conclusion of Vedic study, there is no distinction between what is touched and untouched.

सूतकान्नं जवश्राद्ध' मासिकान्नं तथैव च । हीनाचारद्विजस्यान्नं भुक्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ॥२२९।।
After eating food affected by birth impurity, food from a śrāddha performed hastily, monthly śrāddha food, or food belonging to a twice-born of improper conduct, one should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance.

आसने पादमारूढं प्रत्यक्षं लवणं तथा । मुखेन धमितं चान्नं तुल्यं गोमांस भक्षणम् ॥२३०॥
Food touched by the foot while on a seat, openly taken salt, and food blown upon with the mouth are considered equivalent to eating cow's flesh.

समीपस्थानतिक्रम्य ब्राह्मणान् वेदपारगान् । दाने भोजनकाले च तत्फलं निष्फलं भवेत् ॥२३१॥
If, at the time of giving gifts or food, one passes over Brāhmaṇas who are learned in the Veda and gives preference to those standing nearby, the merit of that act becomes fruitless.

पूजयेत् श्राद्धकालेषु यतिनं ब्रह्मचारिणम् । विप्रानुद्धरते पापात् पितृमातृगणैरपि ॥२३२।।
During śrāddha, one should honour an ascetic and a Brahmacārin; by honouring such Brāhmaṇas, one is freed from sins, together with the groups of one's paternal and maternal ancestors.

--- Page 23 ---

आमंत्रिणो (तं) गतं विप्रं निवारयति दुर्मतिः । ब्रह्महत्यामवाप्नोति शूद्रयोनिषु जायते ॥२३३।।
A wicked-minded person who prevents an invited Brāhmaṇa from coming incurs the sin of Brahmanicide and is born in the womb of a Śūdra.

आमंत्रितस्तु यो विप्रो भोक्तु मन्यत्र गच्छति । नरकाणां शतं गत्वा चांडालेष्वभिजायते ॥२३४॥
A Brāhmaṇa who, after being invited to eat, goes elsewhere instead, goes through a hundred hells and is born among Caṇḍālas.

सपवित्रेण हस्तेन न दद्याद्गंधलेपनम् । दीयते यदि मूढेन निराशाः पित्तरोगताः ॥२३५।।
One should not offer fragrant unguents with a hand bearing the pavitra; if a foolish person does so, the ancestors become dissatisfied and depart.

अनग्निकस्य विश्रस्य यदन्नं हूयते करे। तदन्नं प्रक्षिपे‌नौ भुक्त्त्वा चान्द्रायणं न्चरेत् ॥२३६।।
If food is offered into the hand of a Brāhmaṇa who has no sacred fire, that food should be cast into the fire; whoever has eaten it should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance.

अपेक्षितं याचितव्यं श्राद्धार्थमुपकल्पितम् । न याचते द्विजोमूढः सविप्रः श्राद्धघातकः ॥ २३७।।
Whatever is required and has been prepared for the śrāddha should be requested. A foolish Brāhmaṇa who does not ask for what is required, together with the giver, becomes a destroyer of the śrāddha.

अपेक्षितं न यो दद्याच्छ्राद्ध वै उपकल्पितम् । अधोगत्वा सुघोरासु तिर्यग्योनिषु जायते ॥२३८।।
One who does not give what is required and has been prepared for the śrāddha goes to dreadful lower realms and is born in an animal womb.

शब्देनापोशनं पीत्वा शब्दे न घृतपायसम् । शब्देनापः पयः पीत्वा सुरापानसमं भवेत् ॥ २३९।।
If one drinks the āpośana water with a sound, or consumes ghee and pāyasa with a sound, and drinks water or milk noisily, it becomes equivalent to drinking liquor.

अत्युक्तमन्नं विप्रस्तु पाणिनास्पर्शते यदि । त्रयस्ते नरकं यान्ति दाता भोक्ता च पूर्वजाः ॥२४०।।
If a Brāhmaṇa touches with his hand food that has been spoken over or excessively described, the three—the giver, the eater, and the ancestors—go to hell.

अप्रवाहोदकं स्नानं विप्रपादाभिषेचनम् । गायत्री जपमध्यंच आदित्यभिमुखोभवेत् ।।२४१।।
One should bathe in flowing water, wash the feet of the Brāhmaṇa, and during the recitation of the Gāyatrī should face the Sun.

ग्रन्थिर्यस्य पवित्रस्य विप्रपादाभिषेचनम् । यथा वज्रहतो वृक्षो देवता पितरस्तथा ।।२४२।।
The Brāhmaṇa whose pavitra has a knot should have his feet washed; just as a tree struck by a thunderbolt is destroyed, so are the deities and ancestors [when the prescribed rite is improperly performed].

नान्दीमुखोत्सवे दाने द्वादश्यादि व्रतेषु च । पूर्वाभिमुखतः कुर्याद्विप्रपादाभिषेचनं ॥२४३॥
At the Nandīmukha ceremony, while giving gifts, and during observances beginning with Dvādaśī, one should wash the Brāhmaṇa's feet while facing east.

--- Page 24 ---

विप्रपादाभिषेके तु कर्ता प्रत्यङ्मुखोभवेत् । दिवारात्राणि वा कुर्यात् नित्यश्राद्धं विधीयते ॥२४४।।
While washing the feet of the Brāhmaṇa, the performer should face west. The daily śrāddha should be performed either during the day or at night.

रजस्वलायां भार्यायां मृताहं यः परित्यजेत् । स वै नरकमाप्नोति हन्ति देवान् पितॄ स्तथा ॥२४५॥
He who neglects the death-day observance when his wife is menstruating goes to hell; he thereby destroys the rites of the gods and ancestors.

पंडितोज्ञानिनो वापि मूर्खयोषित एव वा । मृताहः स्वमतिक्रम्य चांडालः कोटिजन्मसु ॥२४६॥
Whether learned or ignorant, or whether the woman is wise or foolish, one who neglects the prescribed death-day becomes a Caṇḍāla for millions of births.

पित्रोः क्षयाहे संप्राप्त यः कुर्यात्तिलतर्पणम् । आसुरं तर्पणं ज्ञेयं तत्तोयं रुधिरंभवेत् ॥ २४७॥
When the death-day of one's parents has arrived, whoever performs sesame-water offering [in the prohibited manner] should know that offering to be demonic; that water becomes blood.

आपोशानं करे विप्रे संकल्पं यः समाचरेत् । नष्टं भवतितच्छ्राद्ध ं पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥२४८॥
If, while the Brāhmaṇa has āpośana water in his hand, one makes the saṅkalpa, that śrāddha is considered destroyed and does not reach the ancestors.

आपोशानं करे कृत्वा आशीर्वादं करोति यः । अभोज्यं तद्भवेदन्नं भुक्त्त्वा चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ॥२४९॥
If, after placing āpośana water in his hand, one gives blessings, that food becomes unfit to eat; whoever eats it should undertake the Cāndrāyaṇa observance.

भूमौ यस्तर्पणं कुर्यात् कांस्यतोयं तथैव च । तर्जन्यंगुष्ठमध्ये तु तज्जलं रुधिरं भवेत् ॥२५०।।
Whoever performs the offering upon the ground, or uses water from a bronze vessel, and [offers it] between the index finger and thumb, that water becomes blood.

अगोधूमं तु यच्छ्राद्धं माषमुद्ङ्गविवर्जितम् । तैलपक्वेन रहितं तच्छ्राद्धं निष्फलं भवेत् ॥२५१।।
A śrāddha without wheat, without māṣa and mudga beans, and without food prepared with oil becomes fruitless.

माषान्नं पायसं दद्याच्छ्राद्ध गव्यं विशेषतः । आचन्द्रार्क भवेत्तृप्तिः भोजने पिंडदानयोः ॥२५२।।
One should offer māṣa rice, pāyasa, and especially products of the cow at the śrāddha. By eating and offering piṇḍas, satisfaction of the ancestors continues as long as the Moon and Sun endure.

नैककाले द्वयं स्नानं स्नानद्वये न तर्पणम् । नैकपादे द्वयं श्राद्धं न दिवा भोजनद्वयम् ॥२५३।।
One should not bathe twice at the same time, nor perform tarpaṇa twice after two baths; two śrāddhas should not be performed in one period, nor should one take two meals during the day.

सूक्तस्तोत्रजपेत्युक्त्त्वा पिंडाघ्राणं च दक्षिणाम् । आह्वानं चागतं चाध्य विना च परिवेषणम् ॥२५४॥
After reciting the sūktas, hymns, and mantras, one should perform the smelling of the piṇḍa and give the dakṣiṇā; the invitation and the welcoming [should be performed], together with the proper serving of the food.


--- Page 25 ---

विसर्जनं सौमनस्यमाशिषः प्रार्थनां तथा । विप्रप्रदक्षिणं चैव स्वस्तिवाचनर्क विना ॥२५५।।
Dismissal, good wishes, prayers for blessings, circumambulation of the Brāhmaṇas, and the recitation of auspicious words should all be performed.

पितृमन्यत्प्रकर्तव्यं प्राचीनावीतिना सह । सम्बन्धं प्रथमं ब्रूयात् गोत्रं नाम ततः परम् ॥२५६।।
The rites for the ancestors should be performed while wearing the sacred thread in the prācīnāvīta manner. First, the relationship should be stated, followed by the gotra and then the name.

पश्चाद्रूपं विजानीयात् व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा । प्राचीनावीतिना पित्र्यं सव्यं जानुनिपाततम् । दक्षिणास्थेन कर्तव्यमप्रदक्षिणतस्तिलैः ॥ २५७৷৷
Afterwards, the form of the rite should be understood according to the teaching of Vyāghra. The ancestral rite should be performed with the sacred thread in the prācīnāvīta position, with the left knee touching the ground, while seated toward the south, and with sesame offered without circumambulation.

यत्किचिद्दीयते श्राद्ध देवतीर्थेन दैविके । पैत्रिके पितृतीर्थेन सर्वत्रैषविधिः स्मृतः ॥ २५८।।
Whatever is offered in the śrāddha should be offered through the deva-tīrtha in rites for the gods, and through the pitṛ-tīrtha in rites for the ancestors. This is the prescribed rule everywhere.

पितॄणमासनं दद्याद्वामपार्श्वे तथा सुधी । दक्षिणे चैव देवानां सर्वदा श्राद्धकर्मणि ॥२५९।।
The wise person should provide seats for the ancestors on the left side, and for the gods on the right side, always during the śrāddha ceremony.

देवानां ऋजवोदर्भा अच्छिन्नाग्राः अमूलकाः । समूलाः पितृकार्येषु दक्षिणाग्रा द्विभुग्नकाः ॥२६०।।
For the gods, the kuśa grass should be straight, unbroken at the tips, and without roots. For the rites of the ancestors, it should have its roots, point toward the south, and be bent in two places.

नाकस्था नरकस्थाश्च नानायोनिगता अपि । स्वपितृभ्योषधयत्येव (१) श्राद्धं कुर्यात्समाहितः ।।२६१।।
Whether they dwell in heaven, in hell, or have entered various forms of birth, one should perform the śrāddha with concentration for one's ancestors.

क्षणे चाह्वानसंकल्पे पिंडदानान्नदानयोः । पिंडाभ्यंजनकाले च तथैवांजनकर्मणि ॥२६२।।
At the time of the invitation and saṅkalpa, during the offering of piṇḍas and food, at the time of anointing the piṇḍas, and likewise during the application of unguents, [the prescribed declaration should be made].

अक्षय्यासनपाद्येषु गंधाद्याच्छादनेषु च । श्राद्धकर्मणि चैतेषु गोत्रं नाम प्रकाशयेत् ॥२६३।।
During the offering of the imperishable seat and pādya, and during the presentation of fragrances and other coverings, as well as in these śrāddha rites, the gotra and name should be clearly pronounced.

दत्तेवाप्यथवादत्ते भूमौयो निःक्षिपेद्वलिं । तदन्नं निष्फलं भूयात् निराशाः पितरोगताः ॥२६४।।
Whether given or not given, whoever places the offering upon the ground, that food becomes fruitless, and the ancestors become dissatisfied.


--- Page 26 ---

अमावास्या मासिकं च मृताहे व्यतिरेकि यत् । त्रयं कर्तुमशक्तश्चेत् सुतं शिष्यं च कारयेत् ॥२६५।।
If one is unable to perform the three rites—Amāvāsyā, monthly śrāddha, and the rite on the death anniversary—one should have a son or a disciple perform them.

राजकार्ये नियुक्तस्य बंधनिग्रहवर्तिनः । व्यसनेषु च सर्वेषु श्राद्ध' विप्रेण कारयेत् ॥२६६।।
For one who is engaged in royal service, confined or under restraint, or afflicted by any calamity, the śrāddha should be performed by a Brāhmaṇa.

महालये गयाश्राद्ध प्रेतश्राद्ध तु मासिके । पिण्डशब्दप्रयोगः स्पादन्नमन्यत्र कीर्तयेत् ।।२६७।।
In Mahālaya śrāddha, Gayā śrāddha, and preta śrāddha, the term “piṇḍa” should be used; in other rites, the offering should be referred to as “food.”

सर्वत्रोंकारमुच्चार्य श्राद्धमंत्रेषु नोच्चरेत् । आर्षच्छन्दांसि वै तद्वद्यज्ञतः पूर्वकर्मणि ॥२६८।।
The syllable Oṃ should be pronounced everywhere, but it should not be pronounced in the mantras of the śrāddha. Likewise, the Vedic metres of the ṛṣis should be used in the preliminary rites before the sacrifice.

सर्वायासविनिर्मुक्तः कामक्रोधविवर्जितैः । भवितव्यं भवद्भिश्च मया च श्राद्धकारिणा ॥२६९॥
Those performing the śrāddha, both you and I, should be free from all exertion and should remain devoid of desire and anger.

आयुः प्रशस्यमैश्वर्य सर्वं च लभते शुभम् । नैमित्तिके यथाश्राद्ध न दद्यात्सूत्रवाससी ॥२७०।।
One obtains long life, prosperity, and every auspicious blessing. In a naimittika śrāddha, one should not give [food or offerings] while wearing a garment made of thread.

भ्रमन्ति पितरस्तस्य दीना नग्नाश्च वत्सरम् । गृहिणी चैव सुस्नाता पाकं कुर्यात्प्रयत्नतः ॥ २७१।।
His ancestors wander for a year, distressed and naked. The householder's wife, having bathed properly, should carefully prepare the food.

निष्पन्नेषु च पाकेषु पुनः स्नानं समाचरेत् । मातापित्रोश्च कर्तव्यमेकोद्दिष्ट' क्वचित्कचित् ।।२७२।।
After the food has been prepared, she should bathe again. For the mother and father, the ekoddiṣṭa rite should also be performed on the prescribed occasions.

देशाचारं कुलाचारं प्रत्यब्दं विधिवन्नरैः । पितृव्यभ्रातृ मातॄणां ज्येष्ठानां पार्वणं स्मृतम् ॥ एकोद्दिष्ट कनिष्ठानां दम्पत्योः पार्वणं मिथः ॥२७३।।
According to the customs of the region and family, a person should perform the rites every year according to the prescribed procedure. For elder paternal uncles, brothers, mothers, and other elders, the pārvaṇa śrāddha is prescribed; for younger relatives, the ekoddiṣṭa is prescribed, while for husband and wife the pārvaṇa rite is prescribed for each other.

गजुषाः सामगाः पूर्व मध्येजुह्वत्यथर्वणः । बह्वर्चाः श्राद्धशेषेण वैश्वदेवस्त्रिधामतः ॥२७४।।
The Yajurvedins and Sāmavedins [perform the rite] first, the Atharvavedins in the middle, and the Bahvṛcas afterward; with the remnants of the śrāddha, the Vaiśvadeva rite is performed in the three prescribed places.


--- Page 27 ---

ब्राह्मणं न परीक्षेत दैवेकर्मणि धर्मवित् । पित्र्ये कर्मणि संप्राप्त परीक्षेत प्रयत्नतः ॥ २७५।।
A knower of dharma should not examine a Brāhmaṇa for a rite intended for the gods; but when the ancestral rite is to be performed, he should carefully examine [the Brāhmaṇa].

दक्षिणाप्रवणेदेशे तीर्थवापि गृहेपिवा । स्वभूमौ तु नदीतीरे केशाद्य पद्रवे हते ॥२७६॥
The śrāddha should be performed in a place that slopes toward the south, at a sacred tīrtha, in one's own house, or on one's own land on the bank of a river, after removing disturbances such as hair and other impurities.

श्राद्धकर्ता च पूर्वेद्यः संध्याद्युपासने कृते । श्वः श्राद्ध करिष्यामीत्यशक्तो वाचयेत्सुतान् ।।२७७৷৷
The performer of the śrāddha should, on the preceding day, perform the Sandhyā and other daily observances. If he is unable to do so himself, he should have his sons make the declaration, “Tomorrow I shall perform the śrāddha.”

इत्युक्तो गुणसंपन्नान् ब्राह्मणान् पूर्ववासरे । निमंत्रयीत तान्भक्त्या नियोगाख्यानपूर्वकम् ॥२७८॥
Having said this, on the preceding day he should respectfully invite qualified Brāhmaṇas, stating the purpose for which they are being invited.

न विना ब्रह्मचर्येण ब्राह्मणाः श्राद्धकर्मणि । यतिश्च ब्रह्मचारी च न दाने तौ निमंत्रयेत् ॥२७९॥
Brāhmaṇas should not participate in the śrāddha rite without observing brahmacarya. A yati and a brahmacārin should not be invited for the giving of [ordinary] gifts.

अयातयामा विज्ञेया नियोज्याश्च पुनः पुनः । अकृते पिण्डदाने तु ब्राह्मणो वमते यदि ॥२८०॥
Those who have not become exhausted by previous ritual obligations should be understood as suitable and should be appointed again and again. If a Brāhmaṇa vomits before the piṇḍa offering has been completed—

पुनः पार्क च कृत्वा तु श्राद्ध ं कुर्यात्प्रयत्नतः । पितृदेवक्रियां कृत्वा परपाकं तु सेवते ॥२८१॥
—then the food should be prepared again and the śrāddha should carefully be performed anew. Having performed the rites for the ancestors and gods, if one partakes of food prepared by another—

दातुः कर्मफलप्राप्तिर्भोक्ता भुक्त तु किल्विषम् । अविभक्ताः सुताः सर्वे एकं कुर्युमृतादिकम् ॥ २८२।।
—the giver obtains the fruit of the ritual action, while the one who eats incurs the sin. If all the sons are undivided, they should together perform the rites connected with the death and its anniversary.

ग्रामान्तरे पृथक्कुर्याद्दर्शश्राद्धानुमासिकम् । अविभक्ताः पृथग्ग्रामाः स्वस्वार्जितधनाशनाः ॥२८३॥
If they reside in different villages, they should separately perform the new-moon and monthly śrāddhas. If the undivided brothers live in different villages and subsist on their individually earned wealth—

भ्रातरः कुर्वतेश्राद्ध मातापित्रोः पृथक् पृथक् । विप्रस्तु दक्षिणं पादं पितरस्तु उदङ्‌मुखाः ।।२८४।।
—the brothers should perform the śrāddha for their mother and father separately. The Brāhmaṇa should have his right foot [or position] toward the south, while the ancestors should face north.

भ्रात्रे भगिन्यै पुत्राय स्वामिने मातुलाय च । मित्राय गुरवेश्राद्धमेकोद्दिष्टं न पार्वणम् ॥२८५।।
For a brother, sister, son, husband or master, maternal uncle, friend, or teacher, the ekoddiṣṭa śrāddha is prescribed, not the pārvaṇa śrāddha.


--- Page 28 ---

पाणिहोमे कथं कुडं कियन्मात्रं विधीयते । तन्ममाचक्ष्वविप्रर्षे पृच्छतः शुद्धमानसः ॥२८६॥
O revered Brāhmaṇa-sage, I ask with a pure mind: in the hand-offering fire rite, how is the kuṇḍa to be made, and what should its prescribed size be?

दमैः कुडं प्रकर्तव्यं चतुरस्र' सुशोभनम् । साष्टरष्टभिरेवस्यात् समूलैर्नात्र संशयः ॥२८७।।
The kuṇḍa should be made square and beautiful, using darbha grass; it should measure eight by eight [units], using darbhas with their roots. Of this there is no doubt.

दर्भस्य समिधं तत्र जुहुयान्मौनमास्थितः । सोमाग्नीदेवते तत्र पितृमत्कव्यवाहने ।।२८८।।
There, while maintaining silence, one should offer darbha as the sacrificial fuel. Soma and Agni are the presiding deities there, and the ancestral offering is conveyed through the Kavyavāhana fire.

अपसव्येन होतव्यमाहुतीद्वयमेव च । यावत्पाणियजा (?) कुण्डं विपरीतं न कारयेत् ॥२८९।।
The two oblations should be offered in the apasavya manner. As long as the hand-offering rite is being performed, the kuṇḍa should not be arranged in the reverse manner.

बहिः कर्मणि कुण्डं च त्रिक्रोणं च सदाभवेत् । नवश्राद्धषु सर्वेषु कुण्डं पाणितले मतम् ॥ २९०।।
For rites performed outside, the kuṇḍa should always be triangular. In all the newly prescribed śrāddhas, the kuṇḍa is understood to be made in the palm of the hand.

परिस्तरणमुद्दिष्ट' पात्रमेकं शिशोदये । पाणिहोमे च ये दर्भा पात्रे वाधस्तु निःक्षिपेत् ॥२९१॥
The prescribed spreading of darbha is [to be done], with one vessel [used] at the time of the rite. The darbhas used in the hand-offering rite should be placed beneath the vessel.

पुनरग्नौ च तान्हुत्वा दहन्ति पितरस्तथा । आदौ पिता तथा माता सापत्नजननी तथा ।।२९२।।
Having again offered those [darbhas] into the fire, the ancestors are thereby burned [or affected]. First comes the father, then the mother, and then the stepmother.

मातामहाः सपत्नीका आत्मपत्न्यस्तदन्तरं । सुतभ्रातृपितृव्याश्च मातुलाश्च सपत्निकाः ॥२९३॥
Then come the maternal grandfathers with their wives, followed by one's own wife; then sons, brothers, paternal uncles, and maternal uncles together with their wives.

दुहिता च स्वसा प्रोक्ता दौहित्रो भागिनेयकः । पितृष्वसा मातृष्वसा श्वशुरो गुरवस्तथा ।।२९४।।
The daughter and sister are mentioned, followed by the daughter's son and sister's son; then the paternal aunt, maternal aunt, father-in-law, and teachers.

एते स्युः पितरस्तीर्थे तर्पणे च महालये । श्राद्धात्प्रागेव कुर्वन्ति वैश्वदेवं च ये द्विजाः ॥ २९५।।
These are regarded as ancestors in the sacred rite of tarpaṇa and in the Mahālaya. Those Brāhmaṇas who perform the Vaiśvadeva rite before the śrāddha—

एकादशाह्निकं भुत्क्त्वा तत्र ह्यते परान्नं पायसं क्षीरं कांजीपक्क विधीयते । तथैव च ॥२९६॥
—having partaken of the food offered on the eleventh day, [should observe that] food prepared by others, pāyasa, milk, and kāñjī-cooked preparations are prescribed there likewise.


--- Page 29 ---

पितृशेषं तथोच्छिष्टं वैश्वदेवं न कारयेत् । पित्र्यर्थं निर्वपेत्पाकं वैश्वदेवार्थमेव च ॥ वैश्वदेवं न पित्र्यर्थ न दार्श वैश्वदेविकं ॥ २९७॥
The Vaiśvadeva rite should not be performed with the remnants or leftovers of the ancestral offering. Food should be prepared separately for the ancestors and separately for Vaiśvadeva; the Vaiśvadeva offering is not to be made from the ancestral food, nor should the Darśa Vaiśvadeva rite be performed with it.

पितृपाकं समुद्धृत्य वैश्वदेवं करोति यः । आसुरं तद्भवेच्छ्राद्ध पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति ॥२९८॥
Whoever performs Vaiśvadeva after taking out the food prepared for the ancestors, [without preparing it properly as prescribed], that śrāddha becomes demonic, and it does not reach the ancestors.

हुतशेषं न दातव्यं वायसेभ्यः कदाचन । यदि दद्याद्विजोमोहात् हुतं तस्य वृथा भवेत् ॥ २९९।।
The remnants of the oblation should never be given to crows. If a Brāhmaṇa, through delusion, gives it to them, his offering becomes fruitless.

पाकान्तरेण कुर्यात्तु वैश्वदेवं यथाविधि । स्नाने दाने जपे होमे स्वाध्याये पितृकमणि ॥३००।।
The Vaiśvadeva rite should be performed separately, according to the prescribed procedure. During bathing, charitable giving, japa, homa, Vedic study, and ancestral rites—

सपवित्रौ सद‌ौवा करौ कुर्वीतनान्यथा । नित्यश्राद्धं न कुर्वीत प्रसंगाद्यत्र सिध्यति ।।३०१।।
—one should always keep both hands purified with pavitra; not otherwise. The daily śrāddha should not be performed except when the prescribed occasion for it arises.

श्राद्धान्तरे कृते तस्मिन् नित्यत्वात्तन्नहापयेत् । दर्शश्राद्धादिनिष्पत्तौ नित्यस्य न पृथक् क्रिया ॥ ३०२।।
When that [daily śrāddha] has been performed along with another śrāddha, it should not be omitted on account of its being a daily observance. When the Darśa śrāddha and other such rites are completed, no separate performance of the daily rite is required.

ते नैव तस्यसिद्धिःस्यात् काम्येनित्याग्निहोत्रवत् । आविकेन तु वस्त्रेण मानवः श्राद्धमाचरेत् ॥३०३।।
Its completion is thereby accomplished, just as with the desired and daily Agnihotra rites. A person should perform the śrāddha while wearing a woollen garment.

गयाश्राद्धसमं प्रोक्तं पितृणां दत्तमक्षयम् । रेतस्पृष्ट शवस्पृष्ट स्पृष्ट्वा मूत्रपुरीषयोः ॥ रजस्वलादि संस्पृष्टमाविकं तु सदाशुचिः ।।३०४।।
What is offered to the ancestors is said to be imperishable and equal to the śrāddha performed at Gayā. If touched by semen, a corpse, urine, or feces, or touched by a menstruating woman and the like, the woollen garment is considered perpetually impure.

अग्निराविक वस्त्रं हि विप्रास्तिलाः कुशाः यवाः । एतेषां न कृतो दोषो व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा ।।३०५।।
Fire, woollen garments, Brāhmaṇas, sesame seeds, kuśa grass, and barley are declared free from impurity; according to the teaching of Vyāghra, no fault is incurred in these.

हव्यार्थ गोघृतं ग्राह्य तद‌भावे तु माहिषम् । आज्यं वा तदलाभे तु साक्षात्तैलं प्रगृह्यते ॥३०६।।
For the oblation, cow's ghee should be used; in its absence, buffalo ghee may be used. If that too is unavailable, oil itself may be taken.


--- Page 30 ---

तैलाभावे गृहीतव्यं तैलं च तिलसंभवं । तद‌भावेऽतसीस्नेहैः कौसु'भः सर्षपोद्भवः ॥ ३०७।।
In the absence of oil, sesame oil should be used. If that is unavailable, oil from flax, kusumbha, or mustard may be used.

वृक्षस्नेहोथवा ग्राह्य पूर्वालाभे परः परः । तदलाभे यवब्रोहिः श्यामाकाभ्यन्तरोद्भवम् ॥३०८॥
Alternatively, oil obtained from trees may be used, taking each subsequent substitute when the preceding one is unavailable. If none of these is available, oil derived from barley, rice, or śyāmāka may be used.

पिष्टमालोड्यते येन घृतार्थे योजयेत्सुधीः । वृक्षतैलेषु पुंनागं निबैरण्डोद्भवं त्यजेत् ॥३०९॥
That with which the flour is kneaded may be used as a substitute for ghee by the wise. Among tree oils, however, puṁnāga oil and oil obtained from neem and castor should be avoided.

यद्वा गत्र्यं घृते छागं माहिष्यादेर्वृ तं क्रमात् । तदलाभे गवादीनां क्रमात्क्षीरं विधीयते ॥३१०॥
Alternatively, goat's ghee may be used; thereafter, in the prescribed order, buffalo ghee and other kinds may be used. If these are unavailable, milk from cows and other animals is prescribed in that order.

तदलाभे दधिग्राह्यमलाभे तैलमिष्यते । मुख्यासनौ यथा ग्राह्य कार्यकारणसंततौ ॥३११॥
If that is unavailable, curd should be used; in its absence, oil is accepted. Just as the principal substance is to be used, so too should its successive substitutes be employed according to the continuity of cause and effect.

चणका राजामषाश्च रक्तायावन्नलास्तथा । श्यामाका मसूराश्चैव आढक्याश्च सचत्वका ॥३१२।।
Chickpeas, rāja-māṣa, red yāvana grains, śyāmāka, lentils, and āḍhakī [pigeon peas], together with their varieties—

अग्राह्याः श्राद्धपाके च कुलित्थाः सर्षपास्तथा । हविष्योगोधूमाश्चैव मुद्गामाषा यवास्तथा ॥३१३।।
—are not to be accepted in the preparation of śrāddha food. Kulittha, mustard, wheat used for the oblation, mung beans, black gram, and barley are also [listed here among the prohibited items].

तण्डुला ब्रीहयश्चैव कृष्णातिलास्तथैव च । आढक्यास्तुषरहिता शुभायावन्नलास्तथा ।।३१४।।
Rice, paddy, black sesame, and āḍhakī without husk, together with auspicious yāvana grains, [are prescribed].

आर्द्रकं नारिकेलं च रंभा जंबूश्च चूतकाः । ऐक्षवं वदरं चैव सैंधवं लवणं तथा ॥३१५।।
Ginger, coconut, plantain, jambu fruit, mango, sugarcane, badara fruit, and rock salt—

मरीचं च मधुश्चैव क्षौद्र शु ंठिस्तथैव च । वसुरुद्रस्वरूपास्ते श्राद्धार्थे तर्पणे पितॄन् ॥३१६॥
—black pepper, honey, kṣaudra [honey], and dried ginger are regarded as having the forms of Vasu and Rudra; when used for śrāddha and offerings, they satisfy the ancestors.

नामगोत्रे समुच्चार्य तिलैस्तीर्थेषु संयुतः । न चस्मरेदृषींश्छन्दान् श्राद्ध वैतानिके मखे ॥३१७॥
Having uttered the name and gotra, together with sesame and the sacred waters, one should not recall the ṛṣis and metres during a śrāddha or Vaitānika sacrifice.


--- Page 31 ---

ब्रह्मयज्ञेन वै तद्वत्तथोंकारं तु नोच्चरेत् । अन्वारब्धेन सव्येन दक्षिणेन तु पाणिना ।।३१८।।
Likewise, during the Brahmayajña, the praṇava “Oṁ” should not be uttered. The rite should be performed with the right hand, while the sacred thread is worn in the normal position.

सव्योत्तराभ्यां पाणिभ्यामथवा तर्पणं भवेत् । ऊर्ध्ववाहुरधोयामं खातं प्राक्दक्षिणायतम् ॥३१९।।
Alternatively, tarpaṇa may be performed with both hands, with the left hand placed above. The channel or trench should extend upward and downward, running from the east toward the south.

पंचारत्निमिता तिर्यक् अधस्ताद्दक्षिणायतम् । पंचारन्निमितातिर्यगधस्ताद्वादशांगुलम् ।। पितुः पुत्रेण कर्तव्य प्रपितामहपूर्वकम् ॥३२०।।
It should measure five ratnis across and extend toward the south below; the transverse portion should measure five ratnis, with the lower portion measuring twelve aṅgulas. A son should perform this rite for his father, beginning with the great-grandfather.

दैवात्प्रत्याब्दिके श्राद्ध अन्तरामृतसूतके । शौचानन्तरं कुर्यात्तन्मासेन्दुक्षयेरपि ॥३२१।।
If, due to circumstances, death or birth impurity occurs during the annual śrāddha, it should be performed after the period of purification, even if the lunar month has meanwhile come to an end.

श्राद्ध विन्न समुत्पन्ने ह्यविज्ञाते मृतेहनि । कुर्यादन्नेन कृष्णायामेकादश्यां विधुक्षये ।।३२२।।
If an obstacle arises in performing the śrāddha and the exact day of death is unknown, it should be performed with food on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight, at the time of the waning moon.

आब्दिके चैव संप्राप्त आशौचं जायते यदि । आशौचे तु व्यतिक्रान्ते तत्र श्राद्ध' प्रदीयते ॥३२३॥
If impurity arises when the annual śrāddha has arrived, the śrāddha should be offered after the period of impurity has passed.

अपुत्रा तु यदाभार्या संप्राप्त भर्तु राब्दिके । रजस्वला भवेत्सातु कुर्यात्तत्पंचमेऽहनि ॥३२४॥
If a childless wife becomes menstruating when her husband's annual śrāddha arrives, she should perform it on the fifth day.

अमाश्राद्ध गयाश्राद्ध श्राद्ध चापरपक्षगे । न जीवत्पितृकः कुर्यात्तिलैः कृष्णैश्च तर्पणम् ॥३२५।।
A man whose father is living should not perform Amā-śrāddha, Gayā-śrāddha, or śrāddha during the dark fortnight, nor should he perform tarpaṇa with black sesame.

भरणी प्रेतपक्षे तु महती परिकीर्तिता । अस्यां श्राद्ध ं कृतं येन स गयाश्राद्धकृद् भवेत् ।।३२६।।
Bharaṇī during the Pitṛpakṣa is declared highly significant. Whoever performs śrāddha on this occasion is regarded as having performed Gayā-śrāddha.

मासद्वयगतं श्राद्ध मलमासेऽपि शस्यते । वर्षे वर्षे तु तच्छ्राद्ध मातापित्रोमृतेऽहनि ॥३२७।।
A śrāddha that falls after two months is also considered permissible during an intercalary month. Every year, the śrāddha for the mother and father should be performed on the day of their death.


--- Page 32 ---

मासद्वयेऽपि तत्कार्य व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा । गयायां सर्वकाले च पिण्डं दद्यात् विचक्षणः ॥३२८।।
That should likewise be performed when two months have elapsed, according to the teaching of Vyāghra. At Gayā, a wise person may offer piṇḍa at any time.

अधिमासे जन्मदिने अस्ते च गुरुशुक्रयोः । आदित्यकिरणैः पूतं पुनः पूतं च वह्निना ॥ ३२९॥
On the birth anniversary, during an intercalary month, and when Jupiter or Venus has set, it is purified by the rays of the Sun and again purified by fire.

अतोव्याध्यातुरः स्नायाद् ग्रहणे चन्द्रसूर्ययोः । सूतके तु समुत्पन्ने स्मार्तं कर्म कथं भवेत् ॥ ३३०।।
Therefore, one who is afflicted by illness should bathe during an eclipse of the Moon or Sun. But when birth or death impurity has arisen, how can Smārta rites be performed?

पिण्डजं चरुहोमं च सगोत्रेण न कारयेत् । स्पन्दनेषु द्विजातीनां भिन्नतो जनभोजने ॥३३१॥
The piṇḍa-related rite and the caru-homa should not be performed by one of the same gotra. At the rites of the twice-born, food should be served separately to different people.

पंचगव्येन शुद्धिःस्याद् व्याघ्रस्य वचनं यथा । पिण्डदानं मृदास्नानं तथैव तिलतर्पणम् ॥३३२।।
Purification should be performed with pañcagavya, according to the teaching of Vyāghra. The offering of piṇḍas, bathing with earth, and likewise the offering of tarpaṇa with sesame are prescribed.

विदेशगमनं चैव न कुर्याद्युर्विणीपतिः । पुंसोभार्यागुर्विणीतस्य नाशश्चौलं सूनोःक्षौरकर्मात्मनश्च ।
The husband of a pregnant woman should not travel abroad. For a man whose wife is pregnant, there is also the prohibition of certain rites, including the tonsure of the son and shaving-related ceremonies.

गेहारम्भं पिण्डसंस्थापनं च वाङ्गैस्नानं तीर्थयात्रां न कुर्यात् भूभौ हस्तौ प्रतिष्ठाप्य मार्जनं चैव वर्जयेत् ।
He should not begin construction of a house, establish piṇḍas, perform bathing of the limbs, or undertake a pilgrimage. He should also avoid cleansing by placing both hands upon the earth.

न कुर्याद्यादि मूढात्मा रौरवं नरकं ब्रजेत् ॥३३४।।
If a deluded person performs these acts, he goes to the hell called Raurava.

गंगायां वापिकायां च तड़ागे च तथैव च । वामहस्ते जलं गृह्णन् न कुर्यान्मार्जनं द्विजः ॥३३५।।
In the Gaṅgā, in a well, or likewise in a reservoir, a twice-born should not perform cleansing while holding water in his left hand.

पात्रस्थितोदकेनैव वामहस्तोदकेन वा। संध्यायां मार्जनं कृत्वा नान्ययोस्तु कदाचन ॥३३६।।
During Sandhyā, cleansing should be performed only with water kept in a vessel or with water held in the left hand, and never in any other manner.

उष्णोदकेन या सन्ध्या पदमध्ये तु मार्जनं । उपविश्य तु यत्राय तत्सर्वं निष्फलं भवेत् ॥३३७।।
Sandhyā performed with hot water, cleansing performed between the feet, or performing it while seated—these are all regarded as fruitless.


--- Page 33 ---

वामहस्ते जलं धृत्वा यस्तुसंध्यामुपासते । सा संध्या तु वृथाज्ञेया आसुरस्तेन तृप्यति ॥३३८।।
One who performs Sandhyā while holding water in the left hand should know that such Sandhyā is fruitless; by it, the Asuras are satisfied.

कृत्वा यज्ञोपवीतं तु पृष्ठतः कण्ठलम्बितम् । विण्मूत्रं तु गृहीकुर्याद्यद्वा कर्णे समाहितः ॥३३९।।
Having placed the sacred thread behind, hanging from the neck, one should attend to defecation and urination; alternatively, one should carefully place it over the ear.

यद्य कवस्त्रो विप्रः स्यात् कर्णेकृत्वोपवीतकम् । अन्तर्धाय तृणैर्भूमि शिरः प्रावृत्यवाससा ॥३४०॥
If a Brāhmaṇa is wearing only one garment, he should place the sacred thread over the ear, cover the ground with grass, and cover his head with a garment.

अयज्ञीयस्तृणैस्तत्स्यात् इतरानसतद्भवेत् । उभे मूत्रपुरीषे तु दिवाकुर्यादुदङ्‌मुखः ॥३४१।।
That which is performed with grass is considered unsuitable for sacrifice, while the other is regarded as improper. During the daytime, both urination and defecation should be performed facing north.

तीर्थे शौचं न कुर्वीत कुर्वीतोद्धत्य वारिणा । अरत्निमात्रं जलं त्यक्त्वा कुर्याच्छौचमनुद्ध ते ॥ ३४२।।
One should not perform cleansing directly at a sacred bathing place; rather, one should draw water and perform cleansing with it. Having discarded water to the extent of one aratni, one should perform cleansing in a pure place.

सन्ध्ययोर्भोजनार्थे च पित्र्यर्थ देवकर्मणि । शूद्राहृतेन नाचामेत्तथा चर्मेण वारिणा ॥३४३।।
At the times of Sandhyā, for eating, for ancestral rites, and for rites dedicated to the gods, one should not perform ācamana with water brought by a Śūdra, nor with water contained in leather.

प्रक्षाल्योदक् शुचौदेशे दंतधावनमुत्सृजेत् । निषिद्धाहे तृणैः कुर्याज्जिह्वोल्लेखस्तु सर्वदा ।।३४४।।
After washing, one should discard the tooth-cleaning stick in a clean place to the north. On prohibited days, the cleaning of the tongue should be done with grass; this should always be performed.

कार्पासमुपवीतं स्याद्विप्रोशौचधृतं त्रिवृत् । स्थाने पवित्रे संध्याया षण्णवत्यंगुलीष्वयत् ।।३४५।।
The sacred thread of a Brāhmaṇa should be made of cotton and worn in three strands for purification. In a sacred place during Sandhyā, it should measure ninety-six aṅgulas in length.

करंज-पिप्पल-क्ट-प्लक्ष-कुंभ्यर्क-तंदुकाः । एषां पात्रेषु ना श्नीयात् कोविदाराम्रयोरपि ।।३४६।।
One should not eat from vessels made of karañja, pippala, kaṭa, plakṣa, kumbhī, arka, or taṇḍuka wood; likewise, vessels made from kovidāra and mango wood should not be used for eating.

विपरीतेषु पत्रेषु तिर्यपत्रे च दारुजे । नैकवासा समश्नीयात् नाश्नीयात् भिन्नभाजने ॥३४७॥
One should not eat from leaves placed in the wrong orientation or from leaves arranged transversely, nor from wooden vessels. One should not eat while wearing only one garment, nor should one eat from a broken or unsuitable vessel.

हस्तदत्तानि चान्नानि प्रत्यक्षंलवणं तथा । ताम्र-रजत-सौवर्ण-शंख-स्फटिक-शुक्तिषु ॥३४८।।
Food handed directly into the hand, as well as salt taken directly, and food placed in vessels of copper, silver, gold, conch, crystal, or shell...


--- Page 34 ---

अपात्रेषु च पत्रेषु भिन्नदोषो न विद्यते । एक एव तु यो भुक्त विमले कांस्यभाजने ॥३४९।।
There is no defect in eating from unsuitable leaves or vessels if one eats alone from a clean bronze vessel.

चत्वारि तस्य वद्धन्ते आयुः प्रज्ञा यशोबलम् । कांस्यपात्रमनुज्ञातं विधवाब्रह्मचारिणौ ॥३५०।।
Four things increase for him: longevity, wisdom, fame, and strength. A bronze vessel is permitted for a widow and a Brahmacārin.

यद्यन्यस्मै भोजनाय न कदाचित्प्रयच्छति । कर्मकाले न कुर्वीत मुसलोलूखलध्वनिम् ।।३५१।।
One should not give such food to another person for eating. During the time of religious rites, one should not make the sounds of the pestle and mortar.

तथा संघट्टशूर्पादेः संध्यायां च विशेषतः । निशायाः पश्चिमे यामे धान्यसंस्करणादिकम् ।।३५२।।
Likewise, the sounds of winnowing baskets and similar implements should be avoided, especially during Sandhyā. During the last watch of the night, the processing of grain and similar activities should be avoided.

श्रूयमाणं हि नारीणां श्रुतश्रेयोधनावहम् । श्रोत्रियान्नं च भक्षं च हुतशेषं च यद्धविः ॥३५३॥
That which is heard from women is said to bring prosperity and wealth to those who hear it. Food belonging to a Śrotriya, edible food, and the remnants of offerings made into the sacred fire...

आनखाच्छोधयेत्पापं तुषाग्निमिव कांचनम् । मातुर्यदये जायेत द्वितीयं मौंजीबन्धनम् ॥३५४॥
One should cleanse away sin up to the nails, just as fire removes the impurities of gold. If a second birth occurs through the mother, the second investiture with the muñjā girdle is prescribed.

त्रितीयामग्निदीक्षी च त्रिजन्मपात्रमुत्तमम् । वृत्तिमन्तं शिल्पानि हीनादपि समाश्रयेत् ।। राजद्रव्यं तु ये केचिद् वेदोदोषेण गृह्यति ।।३५५।।
The third is the initiation into the sacred fire, making one fit for the three births and considered excellent. One may learn a craft even from an inferior person who possesses a livelihood. But whatever royal property is taken because of a defect in the Veda...

रजस्वलायां भार्यायां सूतके पर्वणि तथा । तैलाभ्यंग न कुर्वीत संध्यासु श्राद्धकर्मणि ॥३५६।।
When one's wife is menstruating, during the period of impurity, on a Parvan day, during Sandhyā, or during Śrāddha rites, one should not perform an oil bath.

अजागावो महिष्यश्च ब्राह्मणस्य प्रसूतिका । दशरात्रेण शुध्यंति भूमिस्थं च नवोदकम् ॥३५७।।
A goat, a cow, a buffalo, and a Brāhmaṇa's woman after childbirth become purified after ten nights; water that has remained on the ground is likewise purified after this period.

अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि संध्योपासननिर्णयम् । अग्निहोत्र कृतैः पापैः यामुपास्य प्रमुच्यते ॥३५८॥
From this point onward, I shall explain the rules concerning the performance of Sandhyā worship, by performing which one becomes freed from the sins committed through Agnihotra.

--- Page 35 ---

विप्राणां ज्ञानतो ज्यैष्ठ्य क्षत्रियाणां तु वीर्यतः । धनधान्येन वैश्यानां शूद्राणामप्रजन्मतः ॥३५९॥
Among Brāhmaṇas, seniority is determined by knowledge; among Kṣatriyas, by valour; among Vaiśyas, by wealth and grain; and among Śūdras, by birth.

यश्चाभिवादनो (दिनं) विप्र आशिषं न प्रयच्छति । श्मशाने जायते वृक्षो आशिषं न प्रयोजति ॥३६०।।
A Brāhmaṇa who, after being respectfully saluted, does not offer his blessing is said to be reborn as a tree in a cremation ground; likewise, one who does not offer blessings is condemned accordingly.

उदक्ष्यां सूतिकां नारीं भर्तृघ्रीं गर्भघातिनीं । पाखण्डं पतितं ब्रात्यं महापातकिनं शठम् ।।३६१।।
One should not salute a woman who has recently given birth, a woman who has lost her husband, one who has destroyed a pregnancy, a heretic, an outcast, a Brāhmaṇa who has fallen from his duties, a Vratya, a great sinner, or a deceitful person.

सोपानत्कं कृतघ्न्न च मंत्रोच्चारकृतं रिपुम् । भुंजानमशुचिमंतं धावन्तं नास्तिकं तथा ॥ ३६२।।
Nor should one salute a person wearing footwear, an ungrateful person, an enemy engaged in reciting mantras, one who is eating, an impure person, one who is running, or an atheist.

वर्मतं जृम्भमाणं च कुर्वन्तं दन्तधावनम् । अभिवाद्य द्विजो मोहादहोरात्रेण शुद्धयति ॥३६३॥
Nor should one salute a person who is wearing armour, yawning, or brushing his teeth. If a twice-born person mistakenly salutes such a person, he becomes purified after one day and night.

जपयज्ञजलस्थं च समित्पुष्पकुशान्तिलान् । उदपात्रार्थभैक्ष्यं च वर्हतं नाभिवादयेत् ॥३६४॥
One should not salute a person engaged in a Japa-yajña, standing in water, holding sacrificial fuel, flowers, Kuśa grass or sesame, carrying a water vessel, begging for alms, or carrying a burden.

स्वयमेव विधानेन अभिवंदेभिवादकम् । संध्याये नियमानेति द्रष्टव्या अभिवादने ॥३६५॥
According to the prescribed rule, one should himself respectfully salute the person who offers a salutation. The rules governing Sandhyā should likewise be observed when offering salutations.

देवताप्रतिमां दृष्ट्वा यति दृष्ट्वा त्रिदण्डिनम् । नमस्कारं न कुर्वीत प्रायश्चित्ती भवेन्नरः ॥३६६॥
On seeing an image of a deity or a Yati bearing the three staffs, if a person does not offer a salutation, he becomes subject to expiation.

जन्मप्रभृति यत्किचित्सुकृतं समुपार्जितम् । तत्सर्व निष्फलं याति एक हस्ताभिवादनात् ॥३६७॥
Whatever meritorious deeds a person has accumulated from birth all become fruitless through a single improper one-handed salutation.

अग्निहोत्रफलावेदा षडंगसपदक्रमः । अग्निहोत्रात्परो धर्मो न भूतो न भविष्यति ॥ ३६८॥
The Vedas, together with their six auxiliary disciplines and their recitation in proper sequence, bear the fruit of Agnihotra. There has never been, nor will there ever be, a Dharma superior to Agnihotra.

न व्याहृतिसमो होमो न गायत्री समो जपः । नाग्निहोत्रात्परो यज्ञो न देवः केशवात्परः ॥३६९॥
There is no oblation equal to the Vyāhṛtis, no Japa equal to the Gāyatrī, no sacrifice superior to Agnihotra, and no deity superior to Keśava.


--- Page 36 ---

अनलादर्शनं यावत् इतिवाजसनेयिनः । परान्नपक्कं नाश्नीयात् ह्यवसन् पर्वणि द्विजः ॥३७०॥
According to the Vājasaneyins, until the appearance of fire, a twice-born person residing there should not eat food cooked by another, especially on a sacred festival day.

असन्तुष्ट सुखं नास्ति न धर्मः क्षुद्रमानसे । भाग्यहीने धनं नास्ति नास्ति पुण्येऽच्युतार्चनम् ॥३७१।।
There is no happiness for one who is discontented; there is no Dharma in a petty mind; there is no wealth for one devoid of fortune; and without merit, there is no worship of Acyuta.

सत्यानृताभ्यां जीवंतमृतेन प्रनृतेन वा । सत्यानृताभ्यामपि वा न श्ववृत्या कदाचन ॥३७२।।
One may live by truth and falsehood, by truth mixed with falsehood, or even by a combination of truth and falsehood, but never by the livelihood of a dog.

सत्यानृतं तु वाणिज्यं श्ववृत्तिः नीचसेवनम् । सेवावृत्तिभि (स्तु) यैरुक्ता नूनं ते नैव पंडिताः ॥३७३।।
Commerce is considered a livelihood based on truth and falsehood; serving the lowly is regarded as the livelihood of a dog. Those who have prescribed service as the proper livelihood are certainly not wise.

दक्षिणास्योऽपसव्येन तर्पयेत् विधिवत्पितॄन् । बाहूपूर्णतलैः कृत्वा जलस्थस्तर्पयेत् पितॄन् ॥३७४॥
Facing south and wearing the sacred thread in the apasavya manner, one should duly offer Tarpana to the ancestors. While standing in water, one should satisfy the ancestors by making the palms full of water.

स्थलस्थेन तु कर्तव्यं पितॄणां तृप्तिमिच्छता । विनारौप्य सुवर्णेन विना ताम्रतिलैर्न च ॥३७५॥
One who desires to satisfy the ancestors while standing on land should perform it with the prescribed materials; it should not be done without silver or gold, nor without copper and sesame.

विना दर्भेश्च मंत्रैश्च पितॄणां नोपतिष्ठति । विवाहस्त्वेकजन्यानां एकस्मिन्नुदये कुले ॥३७६॥
Without Kuśa grass and mantras, the offering does not reach the ancestors. Among those born into the same family, marriage should take place only according to the prescribed order.

नाशंकरोत्येकवर्षे स्यादेका विधवातयोः । प्रत्युद्वाहो नैव कार्यो नैकस्मिन् दुहितृद्वयम् ॥ ३७७॥
One should not cause such a union within the same year; among two widows, only one should be remarried. A remarriage should not be performed again, nor should two daughters of the same family be married simultaneously.

नैकजनन्योः पुंसो रेक जनन्यके । मातामंगलसूत्रेण मृतायदि चतुर्दिने ॥३७८॥
A man should not have [the prohibited union] with two women who share the same mother, nor with one who has the same mother. If the maternal auspicious marriage-thread [is associated with one who] dies, [the prescribed rite is to be observed] on the fourth day.

उद्दिश्यविप्रपंक्तौ तां भोजयेत्तु जानुदग्ध जलस्थोवाऽऽविलं सुवासिनीम् । स्नानशाकटः ।।३७९।।
Having designated her in the row of Brāhmaṇas, one should feed the auspicious married woman. [The passage is textually difficult here, referring to prescribed bathing and water-related observances.]

सव्येनप्राङ्‌मुखोदेवान् निवीत्युत्तरतोनरान् । शिशोर्मातारिगर्भिण्यां चूड़ाकर्म न कारयेत् ॥ ३८०॥
With the sacred thread in the savya position and facing east, one should attend to the deities; with it in the nivīta position, one should face north. The Cūḍākarman (tonsure ceremony) should not be performed for a child while its mother is pregnant.


--- Page 37 ---

गते तु पश्चमेवर्षे गर्भिणी यदि वा भवेत् । गर्भिण्यां मातरि शिशोः क्षौरकर्म न कारयेत् ॥ ३८१॥
But if the fifth year has passed and the mother is pregnant, the shaving ceremony of the child should not be performed while the mother is pregnant.

पञ्चाब्दात्प्रागथोद्ध च गर्भिण्यामपि कारयेत् । चूड़ाकर्म शिशोर्माता गर्भिणी यदि वा भवेत् ।।३८२॥
Before the completion of five years, however, the Cūḍākarman of the child may be performed even if the mother is pregnant.

गर्भस्यैव विपत्तिः स्यात् दंपत्योर्वा शिशोरपि । सहोपनीत्या कुर्याच्चत्तदादोषो न विद्यते ॥३८३॥
Otherwise, there may be danger to the pregnancy, or to the parents or the child. If it is performed together with the Upanayana ceremony, there is no fault in doing so.

वेदान्तरमधीत्यैव ऋग्वेदं येत्वधीयते । उपनीतिरयं तेषामलंकरणवर्जिता ॥३८४।।
Those who study the Ṛgveda after having studied another Veda should undergo Upanayana without the prescribed ornaments.

पाखंड्यस्पृश्यसंस्पर्श न स्नायादुष्णवारिणा । नद्यां तु विद्यमानायां न स्नायादन्यवारिषु ॥ ३८५।।
After coming into contact with a heretic or an untouchable, one should not bathe with hot water. When a river is available, one should not bathe in any other water.

अस्नातमातुरस्नाने स तीर्थ तु श्रृतोदकम् । स्नात्वा तु वाससी धौते अक्लिन्ने परिधाय च ॥३८६॥
For the bath of one who is unbathed or ill, the water prescribed for a sacred place is to be used. After bathing, one should put on washed and dry garments.

प्रक्षाल्योरुमृताचाद्भिर्हस्तौ प्रक्षालयेत्ततः । काषायं कृष्णवस्त्रं च मलिनं केशदूषितम् ॥३८७।।
Having washed the thighs with clean water, one should then wash the hands. Garments that are ochre-coloured, black, soiled, or contaminated with hair [are to be avoided].

जीण नीलं संधितं च पारक्यं मैथुने धृतम् । अच्छिन्नाप्रमुपवस्त्रं कुत्सितं धमतो विदुः ॥ ३८८॥
Worn-out, blue, patched, borrowed, or garments worn during sexual intercourse are regarded as impure; likewise, an undergarment with a torn edge is considered objectionable.

यज्ञं दानं जपो होमं स्वाध्यायं पितृतपणम् । नैकवस्त्रो द्विजः कुर्याद्भोजनं तु सुरार्चनम् ॥३८९ ॥
A twice-born person should not perform sacrifice, charity, Japa, Homa, study of the Veda, or offerings to the ancestors while wearing only one garment; nor should he perform these while eating or worshipping the deities.

तत्सर्वमसुरेन्द्राणां ब्रह्मा भागमकल्पयत् । ततः सन्ध्यामुपासीत शुद्धचित्तोजितेन्द्रियः ॥ मुहूर्तादग्निहोत्राणि नयंति परमां गतिम् ॥३९०॥
Brahmā assigned all of that as a share to the lords of the Asuras. Therefore, one should perform the Sandhyā worship with a pure mind and controlled senses; the Agnihotra rites performed at the proper time lead one to the supreme state.


--- Page 38 ---

अत्रस्वर्गश्चमोक्षश्च यो यथा गन्तुमिच्छति । यदिच्छसि महासिद्धि तीर्थराजाभिषेचनम् ॥३९१॥
Here are heaven and liberation; whichever destination one desires, one should seek the great attainment through ablution at the king of sacred places.

विप्रपा‌द्विनिर्मुक्तं तोयं शिरसि धारय । दक्षिणां स ब्रह्मसूत्रं स्तेयेमे दक्षिणामुखः ॥३९२॥
One should place upon one's head the water that has flowed from the feet of a Brāhmaṇa. Facing south, one should take the sacred thread from the right side; such an act is declared to be theft.

कुशास्तान् द्विगुणी कुर्वन् जानुसव्यं निधाय च मार्जनं तर्पणं श्राद्ध' न कुर्याद्वारिधारया ॥३९३॥
Having doubled those Kuśa blades and placing them on the left side of the knee, one should not perform cleansing, Tarpana, or Śrāddha with a continuous stream of water.

करोति यदि मूढात्मा तत्सर्व निष्फलं भवेत् ॥३९४॥
If a foolish person performs these acts in that manner, all of them become fruitless.

विद्वान् स्वयं तु यो ब्रूयात् स धर्मः परमः स्मृतः । अच्छिद्रमितितद्वाक्यं वदंति क्षितिदेवताः ॥३९५॥
Whatever a learned person himself declares is remembered as the supreme Dharma; the Brāhmaṇas, the deities of the earth, declare such a statement to be faultless.

प्रणम्यशिरसाग्राह्यम ग्निष्टोमफलैः सह । व्याघ्रपादेन चाख्यातं धर्मशास्त्रोत्तमोत्तमम् ॥३९६॥
With bowed head, this supreme Dharmaśāstra, proclaimed by Vyāghrapāda, should be received with reverence, together with the merit of the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.

इति व्याघ्रपादप्रणीतं धर्मशास्त्रं समाप्तम् ।। समाप्तश्चायं स्मृतिसन्दर्भस्य चतुर्थोभागः ॥
Thus ends the Dharmaśāstra composed by Vyāghrapāda. Thus ends the fourth part of the Smṛti-sandarbha.

* ॐ तत्सद्द्ब्रह्मार्पणमस्तु *
  Om Tat Sat. May this be offered to Brahman.
